Draft R&D Blueprint MTA tool text
=================================

WHO is constructing a tool to help build human capacity to develop
material transfer agreements (MTAs) governing biological materials and
associated data connected to severe emerging diseases with potential to
generate a public health emergency, and for which no, or insufficient,
preventive and curative solutions exist. The tool is intended for use
prior to a public health emergency. It is part of broader efforts to
build capacity to manage sample sharing in a manner that ensures the
full public health potential of valuable biological material is realized
for rapid detection of, and response to public health emergencies. It
builds upon a broader set of principles for sample access, storage and
use, such as the overarching principles detailed in the first part of
the tool.

Efforts to build capacity around sample access, sharing and use
complement existing WHO work on data sharing during public health
emergencies (http://www.who.int/blueprint/what/norms-standards/en/).
This tool is intended to focus on physical samples and directly
associated data (metadata) – such as where, when and by whom it was
taken. It might also encompass clinical information intended to
accompany the samples (such as the disease state of the donor). It could
usefully link to other data being gathered or used for epidemiological
purposes. It is not intended to cover stand alone data, such as genome
sequence data (other than as a derivative of the sample) which would
covered by efforts to consider data sharing during public health
emergencies, which already advocate that that such information is
disseminated rapidly and transparently.

The tool will be accessible to different types of user, including those
in health ministries, laboratories or other relevant facilities, as well
as those generating samples in the field. It will help users with
different levels of experience, from those with little previous exposure
to MTAs, through to experts looking for concrete examples of text. The
tool will help both those sending and receiving samples. It will cover
the movement samples and associated data for a wide range of purposes,
from diagnosis, through to countermeasure research and development.

In order to enable simple, transparent and swift agreement during a
public health emergency, there have been calls for, and efforts to
develop, model MTAs — for more information see Part 1, section on MTAs
during Public Health Emergencies. Such templates can usefully be
supplemented by pre-emergency capacity building to explore the
implications of the wide variety of possible users, sample types and
contexts. As a result, the tool will be:

-  *Interactive* - Enabling the user to tailor the information accessed
   to their particular context through the use of web-based tools rather
   than a static text.

-  *Results-oriented* - Focusing on overarching principles, mapping
   possible approaches for turning these principles into action, rather
   than advocating for any specific models.

-  *Multi-layered* - Allowing the user to access the required level of
   detail.

-  *Flexible* - Including content for MTAs in many different contexts,
   for different purposes, by different types of user.

-  *Comprehensive* - The tool will need to capture the full scope of
   views on key issues connected with MTAs and approaches for addressing
   them.

The tool will have two parts: Part I will address introductory material,
such as why an MTA might be needed, the aim of the tool, when an MTA
might be necessary, specific considerations for MTAs during public
health emergencies, as well as a number of cross-cutting issues. Part II
will explore possible content areas, describing the issues covered, why
it might need to be included, possible consequences of not addressing
it, as well as any connections to other content areas. It includes a
number of questions intended to provoke consideration of key issues,
even if specific solutions may be context specific and therefore need to
be user defined. The digitial tool will include a wide range of example
texts taken from real world MTAs.

The need for such a tool was agreed at an Informal Consultation held by
the World Health Organization in collaboration with the Institut Pasteur
in December 2016. [1]_ The desire for such a tool originates from a
shared objective of advancing public health, in particular building
capacity and sharing public health benefits where the need is greatest.
Building capacity for MTAs can contribute to improving preparation for
future emergencies. Participants desired a tool that was user friendly,
tailored to the needs of both Member States (in particular lower- and
middle-income countries) and other potential users, and focused on cases
where WHO is not directly involved in the transfer of samples and
associated data. The development process needed to be transparent and
inclusive. As a result, WHO released a compilation text for public
consultation. Responses from the public consultation have been used to
improve the materials to be fed into the tool and to better frame its
construction. This is part of an iterative development process and WHO
will continue to work with interested parties to improve the utility of
this tool.

PART I: Introductory material
-----------------------------

What is an MTA?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A Material Transfer Agreements (MTA) is a contract governing the
transfer of materials between two organizations. It defines the rights
of the provider and the recipient with respect to the materials and any
derivatives. MTAs can help to ensure a common understanding as to what
is being shared, for what purpose, and how it can be used. MTAs
regularly govern the transfer of biological materials, such as samples
but can also cover associated data, such meta data or the clinical state
of the donor.

| For an introduction to MTAs see: Material Transfer Agreements: A
  Multipurpose Tool for International Cooperation.
| https://sea-eu.net/object/document/117/attach/MTA_final.pdf

Why use an MTA?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A prompt response to a public health emergency can depend upon the
ability to move relevant samples and associated data from one place to
another. The movement of such samples and associated data must be as
simple and transparent as possible, whilst protecting the interests of
the owners of the samples and associated data. Increasing awareness of
the potential value of certain samples and associated data has increased
the demand for these protections.

MTAs play an important role in enabling transfers and subsequent use by
the recipient, whilst protecting the interests of the transferee. For a
summary of why these agreements are important and a discussion of some
of the challenges in using them see: Science Commons: Material Transfer
Agreement Project.
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/ITGG.2007.2.3.137

MTAs are frequently entered into to provide clarity in terms of the
parties’ expectations. Equally important, they provide a written record
of the provenance of the materials. Further, in the case of infectious
diseases and hazardous materials, they will assist in setting out
parties’ expectations about liability and who is responsible for
particular risks that may arise during the course of using the material.

Ultimately a decision must be made about whether the objective for the
MTA process is to make it smooth, fast and efficient; or to ensure that
it is maximally beneficial to those who most need it. While objectives
for an MTA will differ widely, the best outcome will take both goals
into account and create a balance that responds to different needs and
communities.

Recent public health emergencies of international concern (PHEICs) with
Ebola virus disease in West Africa and zika virus in Latin America have
demonstrated the many difficulties of negotiating MTAs in an emergency
context, and showed a clear need for agreed fundamental principles and
scalable, sustainable approaches for MTA negotiation (for more
information see: Overarching Principles) .

When might an MTA be necessary?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are a number of scenarios where an MTA might help clarify
conditions associated with the movement or use of samples and associated
data. These might include:

-  Export or international movement of samples and associated data;

-  Domestic movement of samples and associated data to a separate legal
   entity (or in some cases perhaps even for different parts of the same
   legal entity);

-  Determining the eventual use or further distribution of samples and
   associated data shared for one purpose but with the potential for
   additional uses;

-  Uses or purposes where there are specific rules or regulations, or
   when a third party, such as a government agency such as a Ministry of
   Health, is (or needs to be) involved;

-  Where the material being moved has a potentially important intrinsic
   value (either the material itself or the possibility of using it in
   other processes or for product development); and

-  As part of larger overarching agreements, such as research protocols
   or bilateral agreements.

| MTAs can be very simple documents, or more complex legal agreements.
  The level of detail may be determined by the potential commercial
  value of the material being transferred and the intended uses to which
  it will be put. A discussion of how these agreements might match the
  details of the transfer see: Use and Misuse of Material Transfer
  Agreements: Lessons in Proportionality from Research, Repositories,
  and Litigation
| https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4315468/pdf/pbio.1002060.pdf

MTA’s during public health emergencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

During a public health emergency, it will be important to ensure that
samples and associated data can be moved, accessed and used for a
variety of important purposes, including the identification and
characterization of the responsible pathogen, diagnostic purposes,
clinical decision making, epidemiology as well as the development or
validation of diagnostic tools. Given the emergency context, it will be
desirable to have in place simple and transparent measures that protect
the interests of all parties. This might include provisions to protect
the supplier that transferred the samples in good faith during an
outbreak.

During the public consultation on this tool, several respondents noted
the absence of a public health-specific overarching international
framework governing access to and sharing of samples and associated data
from diseases other than influenza. Very different views were expressed
as to the desirability or feasibility of developing such a framework. In
its absence and given that a prompt response to a public health
emergency can depend upon the ability to move relevant samples and
associated data from one place to another. The movement of such samples
and associated data must be as simple and transparent as possible,
whilst protecting the interests of the owners of the samples and
associated data.

The tool embraces views expressed by many of those involved in its
development of the importance of continuing to work towards the “broader
public good”. In a public health context, this will involve both the
shorter-term goals of preventing the spread of disease and reducing
mortality and morbidity, and longer-term goals of preventing future
outbreaks and building capacity to mitigate their impact. Some comments
received during the public consultation highlighted possible differences
in understanding of the meaning of a broader public good and the
challenges of accomplishing this in the presence of commercial and
self-interests.

In the early days of an emergency, it will likely be government
representatives who are signing agreements to transfer materials.
Governments will likely be unable – and unwilling – to negotiate
commercial terms that apply to future, potentially unknown, commercial
actors. Furthermore, there aren’t necessarily existing
researchers/manufacturers working with the pathogen of concern with
which to negotiate, or any established marketplace for countermeasures
that can be used to inform the value of any potential benefits. As a
result, even if potential manufacturers are identified and engaged in
the negotiations, they’re unlikely to have a good understanding of their
chances of success in developing a countermeasure, their capacity to
produce such a product, what the value of that product might be, etc.

The tool is intended for use prior to a public health emergency to build
relevant human capacity – not to develop an MTA during such an outbreak.

MTA negotiations are more likely to become protracted where parties
perceive a need to protect their own interests and manage risks. Where
this is not possible, either because a standard MTA is implemented
without change, or because a funding agency or other party (such as a
biorepository) uses a standard MTA, the process of transfer is often
expedited. There have been attempts to develop model MTAs for use during
public health emergencies. For an example of such an approach see the
MTA developed by the Global Health Security Initiative: ADD LINK

Purpose of this tool
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

WHO is constructing a tool to help build human capacity to develop
material transfer agreements (MTAs) governing biological samples and
associated data connected to severe emerging diseases with potential to
generate a public health emergency, and for which no, or insufficient,
preventive and curative solutions exist. The tool is intended for use
prior to a public health emergency. It is part of broader efforts to
build human capacity to manage sample sharing in a manner that ensures
the full public health potential of valuable biological material is
realized for rapid detection of, and response to public health
emergencies.

The tool is intended to build the human capacity needed to develop and
agree MTAs during a public health emergency for diagnostic and public
health purposes, taking into account the full range of associated
considerations. It will also help to build capacity that could be of use
outside of an emergency, or subsequent discussions on further use of
samples.

During a public health emergency, transfers covered by MTAs will be
important for a variety of important purposes, including the
identification and characterization of the responsible pathogen,
diagnostic purposes, clinical decision making, epidemiology, the
development or validation of diagnostic tools as well as medical
countermeasure development.

The tool is not meant to be prescriptive, but rather it is meant to
provide users with options and examples of proven solutions and
language.

It is not intended to be used to develop an MTA during a public health
emergency. There have been attempts to develop model MTAs for use in
these circumstances. As one respondent to the public call for comments
on this tool noted:

    “The tool presents users with an overly broad menu of terms that
    could be combined to create a large number of *unique MTAs*.
    Combining complex terms in novel ways will require time-consuming
    negotiations, which our prior experience has shown can delay
    detection or early identification of a potential emergency. While
    the menu-based approach may offer value *outside of a potential or
    actual public health emergency*, the tool simply contains
    unnecessary information to facilitate the timely sharing of samples.

The tool will be accessible to different types of user, including those
in health ministries, laboratories or other relevant facilities, as well
as those generating samples in the field. It will help users with
different levels of experience, from those with little previous exposure
to MTAs, through to experts looking for concrete examples of text. The
tool will help both those sending and receiving samples and associated
data. It will cover the movement samples and associated data for a wide
range of purposes, from diagnosis, through to countermeasure research
and development.

Efforts to build capacity around sample access, sharing and use
complement existing WHO work on data sharing during public health
emergencies (ADD LINK). This tool is intended to focus on physical
samples and directly associated data (metadata) – such as where, when
and by whom it was taken. It might also encompass clinical information
intended to accompany the samples (such as the disease state of the
donor). It could usefully link to other data being gathered or used for
epidemiological purposes. It is not intended to cover stand-alone data,
such as genome sequence data (other than as a derivative of the sample)
which would covered by efforts to consider data sharing during public
health emergencies, which already advocate that that such information is
disseminated rapidly and transparently.

Cross-cutting issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Overarching Principles
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Past discussions have highlighted a number of overarching principles
that could usefully be codified in an MTA including:

-  *Speed* - in a public health emergency rapid action can be critical,
   making it important that as soon as possible samples and associated
   data are shared with a suitable reference laboratory and the results
   made available to those that need to know;

-  *Sustainability* - the samples and associated data generated by a
   public health emergency can be important for understanding more about
   the disease and in developing tools to combat it. These important
   resources will need to be maintained and managed over the longer
   term. It will be important to think of how this can be realistically
   accomplished at the same time as addressing immediate public health
   needs;

-  *Capacity building* - public health emergencies pose a collective
   threat. There remains much to be done to build the core capacities
   needed to address them effectively. This is an ongoing process
   requiring continual consideration. Successful capacity building may
   reduce the need to transport samples and associated data in the
   future;

-  *Maximal preservation* - avoiding destruction of potentially useful
   samples and associated data. These are important biological
   resources. In some cases, they may be irreplaceable;

-  *Trust* - It is important that the MTA process establishes a level of
   trust among the participants where they feel their needs are
   recognised in the text. This is important also to prevent populations
   from fearing or misunderstanding research and pushing back; and to
   prevent stigmatisation of communities. Issues around stigma, violence
   cannot be ignored.

-  *Good faith* - prompt responses necessitated by public health
   emergencies are often not conducive to detailed negotiations, or
   focus on considerations beyond immediate needs. Addressing longer
   term arrangements for the samples and associated data may need to
   happen after the original transfer has been completed. Both parties
   will need to continue to work towards the broader public good,
   including through the commensurate sharing of any benefits accrued
   from sharing samples and associated data;

-  *Good practices* - it is important that, despite the emergency
   setting, transfers of samples and associated data follow the highest
   possible standards, for example taking into account bioethics issues,
   procedures and practices for safe and secure storage, handling and
   shipping of materials, and principles for access to genetic resources
   Exactly which good practices are relevant will likely be context
   specific; and

-  *Consistency with applicable national and international laws* - For
   example, drafting an MTA will likely have to take into account a
   legal environment composed of both national and international laws.
   Applicable national laws may be contract laws, rules regarding
   conflicts of laws, national security laws, biosafety laws, or
   national access and benefit-sharing measures. Applicable
   international laws could be instruments such as the International
   Health Regulations (2005), in particular its Articles 6 and 46, the
   Convention on Biological Diversity, in particular Article 15 on
   access to genetic resources, or the Nagoya Protocol on Access to
   Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits
   Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological
   Diversity.

Authorised individuals
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is also important to consider who is signing an agreement. It is
important that the individual is empowered to make all the binding
commitments the agreement contains. Whilst the Ministry of Health may
often play a leading role in developing and agreeing MTAs, many other
government departments could be involved in their implementation. For
example, an Environment Ministry might have the delegated authority to
control the export of biological resources, which can include disease
samples and associated data, or the Border Control and Customs agencies
may have specific roles to play in allowing samples and associated data
to leave the country. It is vital that those ultimately agreeing to MTAs
(and the provisions they contain) are ultimately empowered to do so.
Equally, the value of greater inter-agency cooperation and coordination
should be noted. It may also be useful to include in and MTA appropriate
contact points in these other ministries or agencies to assist ensuring
the transfer of materials is as simple and smooth as possible.

Depending on the nature of the MTA it may be appropriate for researchers
receiving and using materials to sign an undertaking that they
understand the obligations contained in the agreement (in addition to a
formal representative of the institution/organization). This is
essential as they will be responsible for putting the terms of the
agreement into effect and are the parties most likely to find themselves
(often unknowingly) in breach.

Origin of samples and associated data

It is important to think about how and why the samples and associated
data were taken and from whom.

In a public health emergency, samples may have originally been taken
from patients for diagnosis and treatment. Informed consent may not have
explicitly obtained for the samples’ use or for future use. There are
practical challenges in being able to meet requirements for informed
consent during a public health emergency, for example, given the
psychological impact of an individual fearing that they are infected.
Furthermore, obtaining informed consent retroactively would be difficult
and costly – recent experiences suggest that samples can become
disassociated from patient identifiers or clinical records. Attempting
to obtain retroactive consent from individuals may therefore be
unfeasible, especially in outbreaks with high levels of mortality.
Governments and the public-health community, on the other hand, do have
obligations to carry out research that might save lives during future
Ebola outbreaks. This research could be significantly aided by making
use of these samples. The original of the sample and the conditions
under which they are taken might also influence thinking about benefit
sharing. There are existing good practices on dealing with such
situations included in the Helsinki Declaration. For more information
see: http://www.who.int/bulletin/archives/79(4)373.pdf

Contents of samples and associated data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The likely contents of samples and associated data must also be
considered. Many samples and associated data generated during a public
health emergency are unlikely to be isolated pathogens. As a result,
relevant samples and associated data will often include elements
associated with the host or patient. In the longer run, such material
might be of greater value than the pathogen as it could provide insights
into the host’s reaction, offering important markers for diagnostics,
vaccines or therapeutics.

Furthermore, pathogens are not static. They will continue to mutate and
evolve. It will be important to consider in an MTA the possibility of
changes in the materials they cover and the scope of the agreement –
thereby preventing the need to renegotiate an MTA unnecessarily.

Value of samples
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Not all samples are equally valuable - a human sample alone is useful,
but a sample linked to clinical data, or part of a series of samples
over time, or which is linked with epidemiological data, can be more
useful and therefore potentially more valuable. The MTA process should
ensure that the greater the cost to the donor, the more benefit they
receive. Samples and associated data can also be used in different ways.
There is a need to differentiate between different types of outputs
which could be generated from the movement of samples and associated
data. These include: papers or other academic output; testing or quality
assurance (QA) for a product already under development; or use in an
unforeseen product, perhaps some time after the material was transferred
or in subsequent technical developments. It might not be possible to
know the value of a sample and associated data at the outset. This may
warrant including provisions to negotiate further use should a sample
and associated data prove particularly valuable.

It is important that concepts of value of samples are explicitly
addressed and shared amongst those involved with developing an MTA. Some
initial thinking on the identification of valuable samples during a
public health emergency was undertaken by WHO at its Second Informal
Consultation on Biobanking in Sierra Leone in 2015 (for more information
see:
http://www.who.int/medicines/ebola-treatment/meetings/2nd\_who\_biobaking-consultation/en/).
Leaving notions of cost and value of samples undefined can create
ambiguity, specifically during a public health emergency, and can lead
to protracted discussions and delay or hinder the development of vital
diagnostics.

It is possible that perceptions of value of samples and associated data
can complicate access. It is important samples and associated data can
be rapidly accessed, transferred and used for public health purposes
(for more information see MTA’s during public health emergencies). As a
result, from a public health perspective, it might be advisable not to
limit access to samples and associated data on the basis of value during
a public health emergency. Discussions over the value of the sample and
associated data and any benefits that might therefore need to be shared
could be delayed until the emergency has receded. An MTA can be a useful
tool for protecting the interest of both parties and for capturing the
intent to return to this issue in good faith after the emergency is
over.

As one responder during the public consultation on this tool noted,
attaching value to medical samples “risks promoting a view that
biological materials necessary for public health responses are
commodities that can and should be bargained for. Further, such
competition may result in uncertain and unequal outcomes depending on
the scarcity of the samples. For materials in short supply, affected
countries may be incentivized to “hold out for a better deal.” For
widely available materials, affected countries may be forced into a
“race to the bottom” to accept less generous terms for fear of getting
no benefit at all.”

Prioritizing work
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Samples from a public health emergency can be a valuable resource in
improving our understanding of the diseases involved and in developing
tools and technologies for use in future outbreaks. There are often also
only limited amounts of samples available for such work. There will be
many uses to which these samples might be put but given their finite
nature, some system of prioritizing work may be necessary. Consideration
may need to be given to who can decide upon the ‘best’ use of available
samples and associated materials and how to ensure an appropriate role
for the communities and governments providing the samples and associated
data.

In some cases, there may be coordinated, international efforts to
structure this discussion. For example, during the EVD PHEIC in West
Africa WHO convened the Ebola Science Committee which brought together
expertise in virology, epidemiology, clinical and behavioural science,
mathematical modelling, and science and public health policy, and worked
with the Ministries of Health from particularly affected countries and
representatives from survivor networks to produce a prioritized research
agenda. This focused on ‘basic’ as opposed to ‘applied’ research. For
more information see:
http://www.who.int/medicines/ebola-treatment/WHO_ebola-science-committee-research-agenda.pdf?ua=1

When considering the use or further use of samples and associated data
to be covered by an MTA, it may be useful to refer or reference such
research agendas. If no structured approach exists, it may be necessary
for parties to an MTA to consider what types of work they consider to be
the most important for the samples and associated data being
transferred.

Potential for commercial development
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While in emergencies it is admirable to want to share information and
samples, if commercial entities are involved it is unclear how willing
they might be to do so.

During the development of this tool, some have suggested that MTAs for
use in emergencies may benefit from a non-commercial model – where the
material is transferred for specific public health purposes, such as
pathogen identification or characterization. Any subsequent commercial
use, such as the development of vaccines and therapeutics, would require
additional negotiation, possibly after the emergency is over. It was
also noted that some institutions may be restricted by pre-existing
commitments to funders or commercial partners on these issues. A
suggestion received during the public consultation on this tool was to
encourage the inclusion in future MTAs of a standard clause allowing
material to be shared between associated parties in the case of a severe
health emergency. Several participants have suggested that subsequent
use other than for commercial development may be more broadly acceptable
but it will still necessitate consideration of equitable benefit sharing
and compliance with rules over the use of human tissues.

Others have suggested that it may not be useful to differentiate between
commercial and non-commercial activities. Some of these concerns about
differentiating between the two – noting that non-commercial research
can rapidly become part of a commercial activity. Others have questioned
the feasibility of excluding “commercialization” from initial
consideration of an MTAs given recent experiences demonstrating the
importance of the participation of commercial actors to develop and
mass-produce diagnostics during the emergency period.

Differentiating between “commercial” and “research” uses of material may
not be feasible in complex public-private product development systems
such as those that commonly exist in the United States. For example,
“research” conducted by a U.S. academic or government laboratory on a
diagnostic product could later have “commercial” potential if licensed
to a commercial actor to allow for mass production. In general, it
should be determined whether “commercial” and “research” uses can be
acceptably differentiated, and, if so, how the differences can be
enforced in an MTA.

Provenance of samples
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The increasing importance of knowing and demonstrating the
chain-of-custody or provenance of material used for commercial
development is also important. A well-documented process for the
acquisition of material makes commercial sense by demonstrating due
diligence and insulating those developing products from later claims
contesting ownership.

Third-parties
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In some cases it may be desirable to include a suitable third party in
MTAs to act as a neutral party to ensure negotiation in good faith and
an unbiased implementation.

| For an exploration of several of these cross-cutting issues, see:
  Material Transfer Agreements: A University Perspective.
| https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC523866/ 

PART II: Content of an MTA
--------------------------

What might be included in an MTA?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Whilst an MTA will need to be context specific, they share common
sections, including:

1.  Overarching principles

2.  Parties

3.  Materials and purpose of transfer

4.  Definitions

5.  Ownership and custodianship

6.  Use

7.  Further use, storage and destruction

8.  Publication

9.  Benefits Sharing

10. Intellectual property

11. Traceability

12. Dissemination of data and results

13. Relevant laws and applications

14. Monitoring, evaluation, and reporting

15. Nature of relationship, warranties, liabilities, notices, settlement
    of disputes, governing law, and consistency

16. Headings, amendments, waivers, and further assurances

17. Duration and Surviving Provisions

18. Signatory

| For a discussion of common characteristics of MTAs used by non-profit
  and for-profit parties, see: Material transfer agreements: open
  science vs. proprietary claims.
| http://www.nature.com/nbt/journal/v23/n4/full/nbt0405-489.html

1. Overarching principles
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It may be useful to start the MTA with a short section acknowledging the
overarching principles governing the transfer. This can help to frame
the agreement and provide context for the specific terms covered in
later sections. It could prove useful in ensuring both parties interpret
the document in a similar manner. These overarching principles can also
act as a reference during the negotiation process – helping to ensure
the result meets the original aims. They can also be useful should it be
necessary to return to the MTA at a later date, for example to reach an
agreement on further uses for the transferred samples and associated
data. A common set of overarching principles would also assist in
developing good practice in the transfer of samples and associated data
during public health emergencies.

Principles that might be addressed in the opening section of an MTA
associated with a public health emergency might include:

-  *Speed* - in a public health emergency rapid action can be critical,
   making it important that as soon as possible samples and associated
   data are shared with a suitable reference laboratory and the results
   made available to those that need to know;

-  *Sustainability* - the samples and associated data generated by a
   public health emergency can be important for understanding more about
   the disease and in developing tools to combat it. These important
   resources will need to be maintained and managed over the longer
   term. It will be important to think of how this can be realistically
   accomplished at the same time as addressing immediate public health
   needs;

-  *Capacity building* - public health emergencies pose a collective
   threat, there remains much to be done to build the core capacities
   needed to address them effectively. This is an ongoing process
   requiring continual consideration. Successful capacity building may
   reduce the need to transport samples and associated data in the
   future;

-  *Maximal preservation* - avoiding destruction of potentially useful
   samples and associated data. These are important biological
   resources. In some cases, they may be irreplaceable;

-  *Trust* - It is important that the MTA process establishes a level of
   trust among the participants where they feel their needs are
   recognised in the text. This is important also to prevent populations
   from fearing or misunderstanding research and pushing back; and to
   prevent stigmatisation of communities. Issues around stigma, violence
   cannot be ignored.

-  *Good faith* - prompt responses necessitated by public health
   emergencies are often not conducive to detailed negotiations, or
   focus on considerations beyond immediate needs. Addressing longer
   term arrangements for the samples and associated data may need to
   happen after the original transfer has been completed. Both parties
   will need to continue to work towards the broader public good,
   including through the commensurate sharing of any benefits accrued
   from sharing samples and associated data;

-  *Good practices* - it is important that, despite the emergency
   setting, transfers of samples and associated data follow the highest
   possible standards, for example taking into account bioethics issues,
   procedures and practices for safe and secure storage, handling and
   shipping of materials, and principles for access to genetic
   resources. Exactly which good practices are relevant will likely be
   context specific; and

-  *Consistency with applicable national and international laws* - For
   example, drafting an MTA will likely have to take into account a
   legal environment composed of both national and international laws.
   Applicable national laws may be contract laws, rules regarding
   conflicts of laws, national security laws, biosafety laws, or
   national access and benefit-sharing measures. Applicable
   international laws could be instruments such as the International
   Health Regulations (2005), in particular its Articles 6 and 46, the
   Convention on Biological Diversity, in particular Article 15 on
   access to genetic resources, or the Nagoya Protocol on Access to
   Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits
   Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological
   Diversity.

During the public consultation on this tool, the difficulties in
balancing the need for a prompt public health response against the need
to protect the interests of all parties was raised on several occasions.
Different respondees believed

2. Parties
~~~~~~~~~~

The parties to an MTA can vary, ranging from individual laboratories in
countries to their Ministries of Health (MOH). Regardless of the purpose
of the MTA (e.g. single purpose – diagnostic versus multiple –
diagnostic and further research), it is essential to determine between
which parties the MTA must be signed and to avoid a multiplication of
MTAs between various parties, for example a first MTA between the MOH
and a lab and another MTA, possibly contradictory or at least
introducing confusion, between the same lab and the emergency
responder/medical care provider which took the sample. Language could be
inserted into an MTA obliging signatories to ensure that other MTAs or
agreements signed on the Material should have terms compatible (or at
least compatible with MTA terms between Ministry of Health and
Laboratory).

It is important that the start of the MTA states clearly who is signing
it, on whose behalf, and whom it binds and provide rights to, including
third party beneficiary providers. In the case of MTAs signed in the
context of outbreaks, emergency treatment, when emergency
responders/medical care providers on the ground are those providing the
material but are not the signatories of the MTA because such MTA is
between the MOH and the recipient lab, MTAs could usefully include the
medical care provider as a third-party beneficiary and include a
provision stating that results must be provided to that medical care
provider directly and systematically.

In most cases, the sampling is not done by the labs, but by caregivers,
phlebotomists, contact tracers, researchers, surveillance teams, etc.
Sample collection is done for the purpose of performing specific tests
related to patient management (caregivers), screening (surveillance
teams) or answering the research question of the study protocol
(researchers). An MTA will need to clarify what should be done with the
remains of the samples and associated data: destruction, preservation,
other use, exportation, etc.

In case the labs directly do the sampling for research, the MTA should
be only between labs and MOH with the support of a research protocol
approved by an Ethics Research Committee (ERC).

It may also be important later in the MTA to detail specific roles and
responsibilities, e.g. nominating technical representatives authorised
on behalf of the parties to release relevant materials or information.

3. Purpose
~~~~~~~~~~

It is important that the purpose of the MTA and the purpose of the use
of the samples and associated data is detailed clearly in the text. This
effectively provides the boundaries on what can and cannot be done with
the materials. It might be accomplished in a general overarching manner
(e.g. the purpose of the transfer is for pathogen characterization
studies), in which case a separate section near the start of the
agreement might suffice. It could also be dealt with in the section for
definitions. It might be replaced or supplemented by more detailed
descriptions of specific tests, reagents, and activities permitted for
use in the relevant section later in the MTA and detailed in a Materials
Transfer Document to accompany the samples and associated data.

Wherever it is addressed, it is important that the purpose accurately
captures the needs of the transfer. This will probably be context
specific. For example, the purpose of an MTA to move samples and
associated data into a biobank for longer term storage is different from
a transfer for pathogen characterization studies, which is also
different for use in developing vaccines or therapeutics.

It may also be necessary to refer back to the purpose of the MTA in
other areas of the text e.g. when dealing with period of use or for
detailing provisions for additional uses.

It is also very important to clearly define the “Material” and it is
imperative to define and organise the data accompanying the Material
that is transferred – especially since it is likely to identify the
subject / patient whose material is transferred. Also needed to be
framed is the specific matter of reliquats. This definition is important
for several reasons: First, it can help expanding or narrowing the scope
of activities allowed under the MTA and exclude certain activities (e.g.
cloning or combining the virus with something else). Second, especially
if ownership is addressed and in case the possible later transfer of the
sample and associated data to a biobank is considered, a broad
definition of the “material” will catch a lot of “things” (substances,
subset of the sample) that could have been done with the sample and
associated data by the laboratory in the diagnostic phase. Third, it
will help to address the changing nature of pathogens which will
continue to mutate and evolve over time, thereby preventing the need to
renegotiate MTAs unnecessarily due to natural biological processes.

4. Definitions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The meaning of a number of specific terms will usually need to be laid
out in detail to ensure common understandings amongst the parties.
Whether these terms will need to be included in the MTA and defined is
completely dependent on the terms of the agreement, but might include:

-  Access or access rights

-  Anonymous

-  Background technology

-  Biospecimen / specimen

-  Commercial purpose

-  Confidential Information

-  Data (clinical & associated)

-  Funded development

-  Incidental findings [2]_

-  Information or Background Information (including the information held
   by either party prior to the agreement and supplied under it)

-  Intellectual property rights

-  Invention

-  Materials, including derivatives, samples and associated data, and
   progeny – also taking into account the ability of pathogens to mutate
   and evolve

-  Modification

-  Non-profit / non-profit organization

-  Personal/Patient identifiers†

-  Progeny

-  Provider

-  Permitted purpose/ intended use of transferred materials and
   associated data

-  Recipient

-  Remains of samples and associated data / unused material†

-  Repository / biobank

-  Research Use (as opposed to commercial development)†

-  Results

-  Subsequent/third party use (or onward use)†

-  Unmodified derivatives

The language used should be accessible to researchers and those parties
that will implement elements of the MTA. This is important because these
parties are bound by terms that they may not be involved in negotiating
or drafting but understanding their implications is nonetheless
important.

How these terms are defined can have a notable impact on how the MTA
relates to the overarching principles. For example, the definition of
unmodified derivatives can affect benefit sharing. Limiting the scope of
the MTA to these materials (and not specifically addressing derivatives
that have undergone ‘Modification’) could result in materials that might
be important for commercial development falling outside of the
provisions on benefit sharing.

5. Ownership of samples / materials and custodianship
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Recent consultations on MTAs for use in public health emergencies heard
that different stakeholders held incompatible views as to who owned
samples and associated data, or whether ownership, rather than
guardianship, was the most appropriate framing of this issue. It has
been suggested that the MTA tool should not be too specific on issues of
ownership – where necessary, the tool should reflect the divergence of
opinion on this issue, bearing in mind different contexts, legal regimes
and scenarios.

One approach that can help address these concerns is to address the
acquisition of rights or title by the recipient over the samples and
associated data transferred. Some MTAs explicitly state that the
recipient gains no such rights. This effectively differentiates
questions over ownership or rights connected to the samples and
associated data from ownership or rights over any results, or
derivatives produced using them.

There are important ownership questions around the results from the
intended use. Some MTAs explicitly state that any results produced are
owned by those that generate them (i.e. the recipient). In other cases,
this issue is not addressed, posing possible confusion as to what can be
done with the results generated. Would a laboratory receiving samples
and associated data primarily for diagnostic purposes be able to
aggregate and anonymise the data generated and use it in part of a
publication? Such papers have been traditional outputs from recipient
laboratories following their involvement in addressing a public health
emergency. They are seen by some as a *quid pro quo* for their
involvement. Careful definition of ‘results’ and ‘purpose’ might be
necessary to explicitly capture permission and in what way the
contribution of those supplying the sample and associated data should be
reflected. This may also be connected to a publication section in an
MTA.

There are also important considerations as to the ownership of any
derivatives or data generated through the intended use. For example,
some might argue that an isolated culture is sufficiently different from
the original sample to have a different ownership. Equally, the
resources produced during the intended purpose may be intangible, for
example, genetic sequence data. Who would own this data? There may not
be simple answers to these questions and there are being explored
outside of a public health emergency. For example, the relationship
between physical samples and the corresponding genome sequence data is
being considered by an Ad Hoc Technical Expert Group under the
Convention for Biological Diversity and the Nagoya Protocol.

Past discussions have also highlighted that in order to ensure that the
interests of individual providers of samples and associated data, and
where relevant, donor communities, are given due weight in efforts to
prepare relevant MTAs, it may be useful to consider:

-  How to avoid causing direct or indirect harm to such individuals or
   groups?

-  How to include these community interests in any agreement?

-  How to engage these communities, in particular on any agreed further
   use of the material?

-  How to obtain relevant consents?

-  What to do when consent cannot be sought? (e.g. death or
   unavailability of the donor or their representatives)

-  How to protect privacy & confidentiality?

-  How to foster participation of researchers from affected countries?
   (capacity building)

-  How to deal with incidental findings?

During the development of the tool, it was suggested that whilst there
may be confusion over the ownership of materials, this could actually
support stronger benefit sharing requirements in favor of affected
populations – ensuring that those most affected by the disease directly
benefit from the use of any samples and associated data.

6. Use
~~~~~~

The MTA should detail somewhere (whether in the body of the agreement or
in attached statements of work) as exactly as possible the uses to which
the samples and associated data can be put. If possible it might also
explicitly state what uses of the provided samples and associated data
are not permitted or require further consent, possibly under a
subsequent MTA. For example, warnings that they cannot be used in humans
and/or animals, or as part of clinical trials. It will be important to
define the types of intended investigations or activities to be
conducted with the samples and associated data. Past consultations heard
of a grey area between surveillance and clinical trials. When samples
and associated data are being used to enhance surveillance, it will be
important to carefully define exactly what activities the outbreak
investigations will include.

These details might be contained in a section on the purpose of the MTA.
It might be addressed in the section on definitions. Alternatively, it
might require a section or statement of work of its own, depending on
the complexity of the intended use.

The ethical use of material – provisions relating to ethical approvals
and appropriate consents (and any associated conditions on consent)
should be included in the MTA so that they are clear to all parties.

Questions as to the necessity of shipping samples and associated data
out of the country should be addressed. This might necessitate linking
the use of samples and associated data to specific locations or
facilities. Further movement of materials or information might need to
be considered.

This section might also address who has access to the samples and
associated data transferred or the results produced. For example, some
MTAs limit access to only those that require it for the intended use.
They might also determine how and when results and data produced can be
shared with third parties. This will need to take into account the
importance of data sharing in public health emergencies.

Somewhere in the MTA, possibly in this section, it will be necessary to
address issues of confidentiality. How should the any confidential
information, such as patient identifiers, provided for the intended
purpose or otherwise associated with the MTA, be handled? How should
patient confidentiality be addressed? Perhaps through de-identification
and an obligation to comply with these provisions. In other
circumstances, a separate confidentiality agreement may be more
appropriate. The type of material and its identifiability is likely to
impact upon its ability to be shared with other researchers. Again,
consideration of confidentiality should take into account the importance
of data sharing in public health emergencies.

7. Further use, transport out of country, storage and destruction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After the conclusion of the intended use, what is to happen to remaining
samples and associated data, their derivatives or information generated?
A MTA should be clear on the purpose and scope of use of the material
shared and what happens to the material once the purpose and scope are
realized. There should also be clarity over how unused material should
be dealt with. For transfers governed by the Convention on Biological
Diversity, any further use beyond the intended purpose and scope stated
in the MTA may require prior informed consent of the supplying country.

Some MTAs include an expectation for further use - that the samples and
associated data transferred, and the results produced, are used within a
specific timeframe towards an intended public good (such as expanding
our knowledge of the disease). In open access models, the recipient is
empowered to freely share the remaining materials and derivatives
produced.

Other MTAs specifically limit to what other uses the samples or
associated data might be put. Not addressing this issue in an MTA
(depending on how the purpose of the transfer is captured) may lead to a
lack of clarity on this issue. MTAs used in other settings often require
the transferred materials and associated data to be destroyed or
returned to the supplier after the intended use. This may not be
desirable in the context of a public health emergency where the samples
and associated data may be irreplaceable. Some MTAs specify that the
recipient partner is to store the remaining materials pending a decision
on further use, sometimes specifying details of what can or cannot be
done during storage.

Past consultations on MTAs for use in public health emergencies heard of
a need to find the right balance between conservation of samples and
blocking any use of them. It has been suggested that the challenges of
agreeing the optimal use of valuable samples and associated data, for
example through a common research agenda, could potentially prevent
important research from being undertaken.

Issues to be considered when drafting a section on further use include:

-  Is there an expectation that data or results generated will enable
   further relevant work? If so, under what conditions might a third
   party undertake such work?

-  How should the samples and associated data be preserved, for how
   long, and at whose cost?

-  Who gets to decide the future of samples and associated data?

-  Should a percentage of samples and associated data be specifically
   set aside for future use?

-  What should happen to residual samples and associated data (unused
   material), especially in terms of availability for third parties,
   permitted uses, or existing research agenda(s)?

-  In which context(s) and under which condition(s) is it acceptable to
   keep remains of samples and associated data for potential further
   use?

-  In which circumstances is it unacceptable not to keep remains of
   samples and associated data for potential transfer to a biobank or
   for further research for the public good?

-  How will any planned further use be vetted against rules and ethical
   oversight requirements in the supplier’s country?

-  What should happen with derivatives, such as virus isolates?

-  What happens if a relevant biobank(s) is created?

-  When, how and with what notification or agreements should remaining
   or unused samples and associated data be destroyed.

-  What role is there for community engagement or input from the
   individuals or communities from which the samples and associated data
   were drawn?

Answering these questions may not be necessary in the MTA itself,
instead a placeholder may be inserted clarifying how they might be dealt
with in the future. For example, simple clauses might be included that
require the recipient to reach agreement with the supplier before any
further use is pursued, or residual samples and associated data is
transferred or destroyed. This could significantly simplify the MTA
required for the initial transfer. It might minimise the administrative
burden during a public health emergency.

A future use clause might limit use for the intended purposes, perhaps
by determining the scope of access, but set out how a recipient might
obtain permission for additional uses. This could include determining
the details of the request, for example that it must be made in writing,
it could determine to whom such requests must be addressed, or how to
handle requests for future use by third parties.

Some MTAs also clarify that the supplier has the right to supply
remaining materials, or similar samples and associated data to others.
This helps clarify that the transfer does not form an exclusive
arrangement.

It may also be possible here to differentiate between future uses -
including those determined to be for research purposes, and those
considered to be for commercial development or exploitation. This may
have a notable impact on other sections of the MTA that deal with
benefit sharing and intellectual property by allowing broad principles
to be agreed in an initial MTA and more detailed discussions over the
future value of the materials being determined at a later date,
potentially after the public health emergency is concluded or specific
future uses determined.

Differentiating between “commercial” and “research” uses of material may
not be feasible in complex public-private product development systems
such as those that commonly exist in the United States. For example,
“research” conducted by a U.S. academic or government laboratory on a
diagnostic product could later have “commercial” potential if licensed
to a commercial actor to allow for mass production. In general, it
should be determined whether “commercial” and “research” uses can be
acceptably differentiated, and, if so, how the differences can be
enforced in an MTA.

8. Publication
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Issues around publication of results are relevant to MTAs. For example,
is there a requirement or expectation that the results of permitted
activities are made publicly available? What review provisions need to
be in place? What timeframes are reasonable?

Some MTAs differentiate between academic and commercial partners - where
the results produced may be fed into very different processes and yield
different benefits (see the section on benefit sharing).

In the context of data sharing in a public health emergency, it might
also be necessary to consider how the results generated by permitted
activities can be best shared with those that have a need to know,
whether that be, inter alia, researchers, medical personnel, public
health officials, policy makers, affected communities. These results
could be important for updating standards or procedures, or even affect
practical measures to control the outbreak. In the context of a public
health emergency, it may be desirable, and is increasingly normal, for
such results to be shared with these communities prior to publication.
This issue is connected with the Dissemination of Data and Results.

9. Sharing of Benefits Arising out of the Utilization of the Material
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A number of relevant benefit sharing principles were identified during
past consultations on MTAs, including:

-  *Equity* – What is fair and equitable in a public health emergency?
   What benefits can be expected in the shorter term? Or the longer
   term? Consideration of securing priority status to access to
   countermeasures developed from the sharing of samples and associated
   data may be important.

-  *Reciprocity* - Access to samples and associated data on the basis of
   the MTA and the sharing of benefits arising from its use should occur
   on an equal footing.

-  *Public health interests* - Access to benefits should be negotiated
   in good faith with the consideration of global public health
   priorities at the core.

-  *Third party access to benefits* - Consideration of whether to pass
   on benefit sharing obligations to third party recipients and
   successive transfer recipients should be considered and negotiated as
   appropriate.

-  *Convention on Biological Diversity, the Nagoya Protocol and access
   and benefit-sharing measures* – Many Member States now have legally
   binding obligations derived from these instruments. The MTA needs to
   be constructed so as to facilitate compliance with these obligations.
   Clarity as to the appropriate focal point for meeting these
   obligations during a public health emergency and any special
   provisions that might be in place (such as retroactive notification
   of transfers and negotiation of attendant benefit sharing) may be
   desirable.

Different types of benefit might be derived from the sharing of samples
and associated data and there are different mechanisms that might
facilitate the sharing of these benefits (TABLE 1).

+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Benefit**                           | **Benefit Sharing Mechanism**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Knowledge                             | Reasonable acknowledgement of the supplier of samples and associated data in publications derived from the use of the materials.                                                                                                                                 |
|                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|                                       | Training sessions and transfer of know-how during and post outbreak.                                                                                                                                                                                             |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Results                               | Sharing with the supplier of samples and associated data any data, results and findings from research conducted.                                                                                                                                                 |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Products or Medical Countermeasures   | Preferential access of the supplier of the samples and associated data to any product or medical countermeasure derived from the use of the materials for public health purposes. Some have raised concerns over any state being provided preferential access.   |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Commercialisation                     | Management of all intellectual property derived from the use of the samples and associated data on terms which take into consideration global public health objectives.                                                                                          |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Reagents and Services                 | Access on preferential terms for public health purposes for the supplier of samples and associated data to reagents or services derived from the use of the materials.                                                                                           |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Development                           | Direct involvement in setting research agendas, or in the prioritization of research objectives.                                                                                                                                                                 |
|                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|                                       | Broader support for the supplier of samples and associated data to take advantage of developments in public health and strengthened capacity to build an effective economic sector.                                                                              |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

**TABLE 1: Different benefits derived from sharing samples and
associated data during a public health emergency and mechanisms that
might facilitate the sharing of these benefits. **

When considering benefit sharing, it will be important to take into
account the importance of data sharing during public health emergencies.

There may be practical challenges to addressing benefit sharing issues
within the MTA itself, especially during the early stages of a public
health emergency. For example, during the public consultation on this
tool, it was suggested that “it will likely be government
representatives who are signing agreements to transfer materials.
Governments will likely be unable – and unwilling – to negotiate
commercial terms that apply to future, potentially unknown, commercial
actors. As a result, detailed benefit sharing terms may need to be
negotiated at a later date when the specific partners, uses and expected
benefits can be better defined.”

It was also suggested that “It is also potentially difficult to
pre-negotiate benefits with commercial partners. Unlike the Pandemic
Influenza Preparedness Framework regarding influenza viruses with
pandemic potential, there is no overarching arrangement governing access
to samples of other infectious diseases. There may not be researchers or
manufacturers working with the relevant pathogen with which to
negotiate, or any established marketplace for countermeasures that can
be used to inform the value of any potential benefits. As a result, even
if potential manufacturers are identified and engaged in the
negotiations, they’re unlikely to have a good understanding of their
chances of success in developing a countermeasure, their capacity to
produce such a product, what the value of that product might be, etc..”

Discussions of issues around ‘access on preferential terms’ have
occurred repeatedly in the context of MTAs. Some feel that any form of
preferential access comes at a cost to others and possibly to the
efficacy of the broader public health response. As a result they have
called for a multilateral approach. Others have called into question the
utility or feasibility of on overarching agreement.

There is also no universal understanding as to the meaning of key terms.
Access, for example, is connected to affordability, research input,
research outputs, and product development. Access might mean lower
prices for countermeasures developed using a sample and associated data.
It can also be connected with fewer intellectual property barriers to
generate more innovation, and greater product possibilities. Access
issues are therefore intertwined with the intellectual property issues.

Challenges in identifying in advance the most effective forms of benefit
sharing have also been raised. For example, during the public
consultation on the tool it was suggested that “in the early days of an
outbreak, it may be premature to commit to providing a specific country
with priority access to countermeasures when, depending on the dynamics
of the outbreak, the most appropriate/effective global public health
response strategy to an emerging disease may require deploying
countermeasures elsewhere.”

10. Intellectual property
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This section of an MTA might need to deal with two different types of
intellectual property (IP). First, on rare occasions the samples and
associated data being transferred might include existing intellectual
property. This might necessitate agreeing in advance access rights to
materials already covered by IP. It is important that one party takes
responsibility for licensing background IP and this is clarified in the
MTA. This would be uncommon for samples and associated data generated
during a public health emergency.

Second, there are broader questions as to how any benefits generated
from the transfer or subsequent uses might be captured in IP. As noted
in Section 9 on Benefit Sharing, IP could be one tool used for benefit
sharing, for example its management though licenses could be relevant to
commercial activities. A number of participants in the public
consultation on this tool were cautious about using IP for benefit
sharing, citing competing commercial and public health objectives. They
also highlighted capacity issues in taking, managing and negotiating IP
terms. There have been calls to include provisions in an MTA to
explicitly excluded from taking any IP. However, several concrete
examples of IP provisions in relevant MTAs have been identified and as
this issue may arise during the development of MTAs for use during
public health emergencies, it is being covered by the tool. The tool
examines different approaches for dealing with IP in this context and
considers some of their strengths and weaknesses, so as to help the user
understand how they might (or might not) apply to them.

Resolving issues around IP is often expensive and time consuming. The
capacity or regulatory regime necessary for taking and enforcing IP may
not exist in all countries. In general, when developing MTAs for use
during public health emergencies, the minimal possible IP should be used
to accomplish any necessary protections. It is also important that any
IP provisions within an MTA should be as simple and user-friendly as
possible.

IP is not only relevant for enabling commercial development, or as part
of benefit sharing agreements. It has been used as a tool to further
public health goals, for example, the Wellcome Trust considers how the
protection, management and exploitation of IP derived from activities it
funds can be appropriate means of achieving public benefits. For more
information see: `The approach of the Wellcome Trust in managing
intellectual property to maximise public health
benefit <https://wellcome.ac.uk/funding/managing-grant/approach-wellcome-trust-managing-intellectual-property-maximise-public-health-benefit>`__\ **.**
The UK Biobank, for example, waives any right to IP created using its
samples unless IP is being used unreasonably to restrict health-related
research and/or access to healthcare anywhere in the world. In such
cases, a clause in its MTAs provide it with a license designed to remove
such restrictions. Furthermore, some IP agreements include non-assert
covenants in which the party controlling the IP agrees not to assert
patent or other IP rights under certain circumstances, such as in the
context of a public health emergency.

There are a number of different approaches to protecting IP which might
be used in different circumstances, including:

-  Open access;

-  Co-ownership of IP;

-  A third-party beneficiary;

-  Patent-pooling;

-  Cross-licensing;

-  The supplier retains the IP; and

-  The recipient takes the IP.

A more detailed typology of Intellectual Property Management for Public
Health Innovation and Access was prepared by the World Trade
Organization: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2878976/

There are a number of practical issues that might need to be addressed
if IP is being protected. How is this to be handled if the IP is the
output of collaborations between multiple parties? It might also be
necessary to consider who can grant licenses or sub-licenses, or if and
how licenses might be transferred. It might be necessary to identify who
is entitled to seek IP protections and in what jurisdictions.

Identifying the most appropriate approach will likely be context
specific. What is to be done with the transferred samples and associated
data could help determine which approach might be most suitable. To this
end, issue-spotting analysis, identification and analysis of relevant IP
issues, can be useful. It will be important to tailor measures to local
legal frameworks. As a result, both parties are likely to need to
consult experts in IP if it is to be addressed in an MTA.

It is important to consider the cost implications of different IP
models, including determining who would bear these costs, and what the
likely impact on the cost of permitted or future use might be. It is
also necessary to consider what resources might already exist to enable
IP to be taken (e.g. are there robust functional IP regimes in place
covering the actions of both the supplier and the recipient? Can both
parties access the necessary legal experts?).

Given that determining IP provisions can be time consuming and costly,
there have been calls for them to be set aside in the context of public
health emergencies. Past consultations have heard examples where no IP
is conferred unless requested, in which case the burden is on the
recipient to make clear their ambitions for the IP. This, for example,
is a clause found in all MTAs used by MSF.

Comments received during the public consultation on this tool suggested
that “it may not be feasible to exclude “commercialization” from initial
consideration of an MTAs and reserve it for future negotiations once an
emergency has passed. Recent experience demonstrates that the
participation of commercial actors may be necessary in order to develop
and mass-produce diagnostics during the emergency period.”

Regardless what approach to IP is determined to be most appropriate, an
MTA should take into account public health needs. In general, even in
models where IP provisions have been put in place, there is an
expectation that publication and data sharing should be open.

Whatever model is adopted, the terms must also be enforceable – other
clauses in the MTA, such as those determining arrangements for dispute
resolution, may be important.

IP provisions need to be flexible enough to address both specific IP
generated from the use of samples and associated data, as well as
background IP (for example, procedures, methodologies, and secondary
products).

It may be useful to include provisions triggering a re-negotiation of
IP, for example, should the use of the samples and associated data
result in unforeseen commercial opportunities.

Finally, there may be risks associated with failing to address IP
provisions. In some cases, an absence of IP provisions in an MTA may
enable others to seek those rights, although it might be possible to
address this through strategic publication - placing key knowledge or
resources in the public domain.

Open access
^^^^^^^^^^^

Should it be agreed that the parties will not seek IP protection, it
will be essential to include specific language to that effect in the IP
section of the agreement.

Not mentioning IP in an MTA is not the same as indicating that none
should be taken i.e. failing to include a provision on IP may enable the
recipient to claim any and all resulting IP. Issues around IP for third
parties might also usefully be considered.

Such an approach is cheap, simple and places a minimal burden on parties
to the MTA. It still requires the inclusion of proactive obligations on
publication and knowledge and data sharing.

Including a clause prohibiting the taking of IP may be suitable when
transfers are particularly time sensitive (negating the need to analyse
and negotiate more complicated IP provisions) or where the capacity or
regulatory framework to take and enforce IP might be missing in one or
more party. It is useful for providing an open source platform destined
for use for the public good.

A relevant case study of such an approach is the `*WHO Pandemic
Influenza Preparedness Framework* <http://apps.who.int/gb/pip/>`__, in
particular Annex 1, Article 6.

Co-ownership of IP
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All parties to an MTA could agree on an equitable co-ownership mechanism
for the management of future IP which takes into consideration public
health objectives. Such an agreement can be relatively straight forward
to draft and to reach agreement on as the negotiations are effectively
bilateral. This agreement can also help to ensure equity through
co-ownership.

On the other hand, such a model is comparatively difficult to manage and
implement. It can quickly become complicated due to differences in
national approaches to IP. As a result, any such mechanism would need to
be preceded by careful analysis of the different national legal and
regulatory regimes. These agreements often also complicate decision
making as a dedicated structure acceptable under both regulatory
frameworks can be necessary.

A co-ownership model for IP may be suitable where both parties have
strong traditions of IP and no other model can be agreed upon.

Patent-pooling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In some cases, it might be desirable to pool patents in pursuit of a
specific purpose. Public health patent pools do exist. Developing them
is a complicated task. Negotiating licenses, as done by the Medicines
Patent Pool for example, is a long and complicated process and unlikely
to be accomplished in times of emergency.

Private sector buy-in is required for patent-pooling to be effective, as
it ensures that the pool has sufficient coverage to actually allow the
necessary work to be undertaken.

A patent-pooling model for IP may be suitable where there are existing
collective efforts towards a specific goal closely related to the
transfer of materials.

A useful case study of a patent-pooling approach might be Hepatitis B
Vaccine and the `*Medicines Patent
Pool* <http://www.medicinespatentpool.org/ourwork/>`__.

Cross-licensing 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are also examples where the necessary IP to accomplish a specific
task can have different owners. This model enables reciprocal
arrangements between those holding the relevant IP to enable
collaborative projects which leverage multiple sources.

A cross-licensing model for IP may be suitable where both need access to
each other’s IP in areas associated with the transfer of materials.

A third-party beneficiary
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A variation on other approaches might be to involve an additional
beneficiary - embedding a neutral third-party into the development,
implementation, and enforcement of an MTA. These third-parties could
include other organizations with public health objectives, such as the
World Health Organization or MSF. Granting an automatic license to such
bodies can be particularly important in the pursuit of broader public
health objectives.

There may be challenges in identifying a suitable third-party as it is
important they have no direct interest in the transfer, are mandated to
work towards a public good, and have a suitable financial status (for
example, operating on a non-profit basis).

Adding an extra party to an agreement complicates it logistically and
may increase the time it takes to find consensus. It can, however, be
useful for ensuring equity. A useful case-study were the MTAs involving
WHO during the EVD PHEIC in West Africa.

Supplier retains the IP 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The supplier can retain all rights to future IP but commits to exploit
these rights in a manner which is consistent with global public health
considerations, for example by granting to manufacturers in developing
countries licenses on mutually agreed terms that should be fair and
reasonable including in respect of affordable royalties, taking into
account development levels in the country of end use of the products.

It is also possible that a third party, such as the WHO, might support
the supplier in protecting its IP if such a capacity does not exist.

Such an approach is comparatively simple as all the IP resides in one
place. It intrinsically favours the supplier. This provides a firm
foundation for streamlined decision making and simplifies efforts to
make use of the IP in the future (potentially encouraging commercial
development). However, that means that all the power also resides with a
single entity, providing a potential disincentive for collaboration. It
can also mean that all the costs associated with the IP fall on the
supplier as well as the burden of identifying potential users of the IP
and negotiating the terms of use.

The supplier retaining the IP may be suitable where the supplier has a
well-developed IP legislative and regulatory framework and the resources
to register, manage and leverage the IP generated.

A useful case study of this approach is the recent decision by GSK not
to seek licenses for products in low and middle income countries.

Recipient takes the IP
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If detailed, or if there are no other provisions included in an MTA, the
recipient may be free to reserve all rights to IP derived from using the
samples and associated data. The MTA represents one opportunity to place
conditions upon the recipient (such as that any IP taken must take into
account public health objectives).

It might also be necessary to reflect ownership issues, restrictions or
conditional terms derived from earlier documents, such as informed
consent provisions, MTAs associated with the provisions of material to
the supplier, or pre-standing agreements between the parties.

It is important to distinguish between ownership of the samples and
associated data (which, dependent upon other clauses within the MTA,
might not be transferred with the samples and associated data) from any
derivatives or IP generated from them.

This approach is comparatively simple, as all the IP resides in one
place. It intrinsically favours the recipient. As this means all the
associated costs also reside with the recipient, it may be necessary
where the supplier lacks the necessary resources or regulatory capacity.
However, that means that the supplier will need to surrender some degree
of control over further use. It will likely require the negotiation of a
comprehensive licensing agreement to ensure some degree of benefit
sharing. As a result, it will also be closely connected to the details
of the governing law, for example for enforcement and dispute
resolution.

The recipient retaining the IP may be suitable where it is important to
incentivize collaboration by recipients.

For more information on IP elements of MTAs, see: `*Specific Issues with
Material Transfer
Agreements* <http://www.iphandbook.org/handbook/chPDFs/ch07/ipHandbook-Ch%2007%2003%20Bennett-Streitz-Gacel%20MTAs.pdf>`__

11. Traceability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is important to maintain traceability of the samples and associated
data during transfer and to document the terms and conditions of the
transfer and any key responsibilities. To ensure traceability of the
samples and associated data transferred, it is often the responsibility
of both the sending and receiving parties to maintain an audit trail.
This should ensure that the material can be retrieved at any time. The
details of how this should be undertaken can be included in this part of
an MTA.

Approaches to traceability can be as simple as detailing when and where
the samples and associated data were put, when they were transferred,
and to whom. They might be more comprehensive, for example, the WHO
`*Influenza Virus Traceability
Mechanism* <https://extranet.who.int/ivtm/>`__ which tracks relevant
samples transfers around the world.

12. Dissemination of data and results
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In addition to publication of findings (Section 8), there are a number
of issues connected to results that need to be reflected in an MTA. For
example, with whom will the results be shared and to what aim? Who will
have access to the raw data, rather than published findings? What are
the provisions for pre-publication data sharing for public health
purposes? [3]_ What restrictions need to be placed on the disclosure of
relevant information? How can quality control of results and data be
accomplished and what role is there for peer review?

There are at least two common models currently used for data and
results. In most public health settings, and increasingly prevalent for
data and results produced using public funds, there is an expectation
that they will ultimately be made openly available. In other settings,
especially as part of commercial development, data and results produced
can be seen as proprietary, and in some cases access is via license. In
some cases, third parties such as WHO might be granted special access to
proprietary information for health work for the public good.

It may also be desirable to include provisions that describe how data
and results will be shared amongst parties to the MTA. For example,
should the recipient of samples and associated data share any data and
results with the supplier prior to publication? Should all data and
results be shared, or only that to be published? Should these results be
shared with third parties, such as WHO, for public health purposes? Is a
license required to do that? What provisions are in place to ensure the
data and results are shared with the sample donors or affected
communities?

There may also be issues connected to dissemination of information
relating to the existence of the agreement itself. For example, when and
how is it permissible to name the partners to the agreement? When and
under what conditions are press releases to be produced, and by whom?

13. Relevant laws, regulations and good practice
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Providers and recipients should ensure consistency with any applicable
national and international laws and many MTAs might include provisions
detailing relevant commitments.

Relevant international rules can be legally binding, such as relevant
provisions of the International Health Regulations (2005), in particular
their Articles 6 and 46, the Convention on Biological Diversity, in
particular its Article 15 on Access to Genetic Resources, or the Nagoya
Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable
Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on
Biological Diversity. They might include international normative
documents, such as the WHO Laboratory Biosafety Manual, the UN
Recommendations of the Transport of Dangerous Goods, or those for the
protection of human and animal subjects, such as those enshrined in the
Helsinki Declaration.

In this context, benefit-sharing clauses may need to take into account
domestic legal requirements (e.g., those related to intellectual
property or existing domestic benefit-sharing measures) and national
security considerations and obstacles that may be relevant. Failure to
address national requirements can potentially foster legal uncertainty
and delay a public health response.

When considering relevant laws and regulations, it might be important to
cover such issues as: national access and benefit-sharing measures,
ethical use or oversight, laboratory biosafety, laboratory biosecurity,
or good practices for handling, storage or shipping samples and
associated data, or the data or results generated. It could also cover
issues connected to human rights and patient confidentiality issues.

The MTA might usefully identify individuals or bodies responsible for
compliance in relevant areas.

14. Monitoring, evaluation, and reporting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

MTAs are largely an instrument of trust as they are difficult to monitor
after their implementation. Breaches of terms may never be ascertained.

It is common to include provisions governing reports on the use of
material provided under the MTA, including the provision of information
covering results, updates on how much material has been used, and how
much remains. Reporting requirements can encourage good behaviour.

Some MTAs specify how and when reports should be made. This can include
both regular update reports and a more in-depth final report after the
intended purpose has been completed.

In other cases, depending upon the intended purpose of the transfer,
more detailed oversight of the planned work might be desirable. This
section could also detail agreements for monitoring or evaluating the
work undertaken. This might include reviewing the implementation of good
practices, such as laboratory biosafety and biosecurity.

15. Nature of relationship, warranties, liabilities, insurance, settlement of disputes, governing law and consistency
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It will be important that the MTA addresses such issues as the nature of
the relationship between the parties as this can have profound
implications on responsibility. Some agreements might establish formal
relationships between the supplier and recipient. It is more common for
MTAs to specify that the transfer does not amount to a more formal
relationship.

Issues around warranties are also important. It might be necessary to
include terms detailing expectations around the materials and data being
provided. They are often supplied ‘as is’ with no guarantees as to the
contents or viability.

The same is true for any liabilities stemming from the provision of
materials or data and any permitted uses. Some MTAs specify that each
party is individually responsible for the manner in which they carry out
relevant activities. It is also sometimes necessary to consider
indemnifying parties against possible claims or costs arising from the
intended purpose. Note that alternative language for limitation of
liability may be offered by some institutions because of their
affiliation with foreign governments.

It is particularly important to consider under the laws of which
jurisdiction the MTA will operate in, and in whose court system
potential disputes must be settled. To this end, it might be prudent to
consider how any disputes relevant to the MTA might be settled. In some
cases, specific sources of arbitration might be identified. . A strategy
that is commonly employed by parties negotiating an MTA is to elect to
remain silent on the question of jurisdiction. Alternatively the
jurisdiction may appropriately be provided as being that of the party
responding to legal proceedings.

Provisions can be added to address what should happen should one of the
parties breach the agreement. This could lead to transfers being halted
or work stopped.

It is important to clarify what is to happen in case of inconsistency
between the text of the MTA and the protocol (or for that matter any
other document) in cases where there may be differences between the
stated purpose, study protocols, and documentation. Establishing from
the outset which has primacy can prevent complications later.

16. Headings, amendments, waivers, and further assurances
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are a number of other common legal elements to be found in
agreements such as MTAs. These might include:

-  *Status of the headings in the MTA* - commonly there to help navigate
   the document, rather than as part of the interpretation of its terms;

-  *Provisions for the amendment of the MTA* - usually only possible by
   common consent, in writing and duly signed and witnessed;

-  *Terms covering waivers of rights* - sometimes used to indicate that
   any flexibility shown by one party in how another party is
   implementing the MTA does not formally waive any rights under the
   agreement; and

-  *Further assurances* - which might include statements of the intent
   to carry out activities in good faith of achieving the intent, as
   well as the letter, of the agreement, or for addressing the transfer
   of rights and obligations to third parties.

17. Duration and Surviving Provisions 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is important to set appropriate start and end dates for the MTA and
any permitted uses. Once again this might be tied to the purpose of the
MTA. It is possible that the end of the agreement might be marked by an
activity, rather than a date - for example, the completion of the
intended purpose, or the provision of a final report.

It is essential to provide which rights and obligations will survive the
termination of the MTA, including for example confidentiality clauses,
publications or release of data into the public domain, as well as
licenses or agreements for further use.

It is also important to consider the events that could cause an early
termination of the agreement, for example, the merger of the recipient
laboratory with another laboratory, if the laboratory is found unable to
meet regulatory requirements, or the laboratory simply ceases its
operations.

18. Signatory
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is where the nominated and authorised individuals sign the
agreement on behalf of their relative institutions or organizations. It
may also be desirable to have the lead researcher co-sign the MTA to
ensure that they are aware of and understand the associated obligations
and conditions.

PART III: Examples of text from existing MTAs
---------------------------------------------

2. Parties
~~~~~~~~~~

Example text 
'''''''''''''

This Materials Transfer Agreement is made as of the Effective
Date………………………….. and will cover all shipments of zika Virus until [the
declaration of the end of the PHEIC by the World Health Organization]

BETWEEN:

[Name of Ministry of Health, having an address at \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
(hereinafter the “MOH” or “Provider”)

AND:

[Name of Recipient Laboratory, having an address at
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_] (hereinafter the “Lab short name” or “Recipient”)
(Collectively “Parties”)

Example text 
'''''''''''''

This Materials Transfer Agreement is made as of the Effective
Date………………………….. and will cover all shipments of … until …

BETWEEN:

[Name of Ministry of Health, having an address at \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
(hereinafter the “MOH” or “Provider”) or [Name of Medical Care giver -
\_\_\_\_\_]

AND:

[Name of Recipient Laboratory, having an address at
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_] (hereinafter the “Lab short name” or “Recipient”)
(Collectively “Parties”)

Example text 
'''''''''''''

Technical Representatives: The following individuals are authorized by
the Provider and the Recipient, respectively to provide or receive the
Materials and Information on their behalf, unless another individual is
subsequently designated in writing by either Provider or Recipient:

For the Provider:

For the Recipient:

Example text 
'''''''''''''

| This Agreement is made by and between:
| a) <Name of providing University and address >(“the Donor
  Institution”)
| and
| b) <Name of Recipient Scientist’s Institution and address> (“the
  Recipient Institution”)

Example text 
'''''''''''''

| This Agreement is made by and between:
| a) (“the Donor Institution”) and b) (“the Recipient Institution”)

Example text 
'''''''''''''

The PROVIDER is making the MATERIAL available as a service to the
research community. The RECIPIENT may use the MATERIAL for any lawful
purpose, including COMMERCIAL PURPOSES, in accordance with the following
terms and conditions.

Example text 
'''''''''''''

| This Agreement is made the…………..day of ………. between
| ………………….. whose registered office is situated at ………………………….
  (hereinafter called "Recipient")
| and
| ………………………….., having its principal offices …………………………., (hereinafter
  "Provider")
| in the frame of [network].

Example text 
'''''''''''''

In this Agreement:

| The Provider is the laboratory sending Materials, as herein defined,
| (name and address of the provider or providing institution,
  designation of the
| laboratory (i.e. whether NIC/WHO CC/H5RL/ERL/other authorized
  laboratory),
| name of authorized official, contact information for authorized
  official)
| (hereinafter referred to as “the Provider”)

and

| The Recipient is the laboratory receiving Materials, as herein
  defined,
| (name and address of the recipient or recipient institution,
  designation of the
| laboratory (i.e. whether NIC/WHO CC/H5RL/ERL/other authorized
  laboratory),
| name of authorized official, contact information for authorized
  official)
| (hereinafter referred to as “the Recipient”)

Provider and Recipient are hereafter collectively referred to as
“Parties”

3. Purpose
~~~~~~~~~~

Example text 
'''''''''''''

WHEREAS this Materials Transfer Agreement sets out the understanding of
the Parties with respect to the provision of Materials by the Provider
to the Recipient, who wishes to use the Materials for the Purpose,
subject to the terms and conditions of this Materials Transfer
Agreement, and its MTD.

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, the mutual covenants
and obligations contained in this Materials Transfer Agreement and its
MTD, and other good and valuable consideration, the Parties will adhere
to the following conditions:

Example text 
'''''''''''''

Supply and License: Provider will deliver to Recipient the Materials and
Information. Subject to the terms and conditions of this Materials
Transfer Agreement and its MTD, Provider hereby grants Recipient the
right to use the Materials and Information for the Purpose, during the
Period of Use unless terminated earlier or unless extended by written
mutual agreement of the Parties. It is explicitly understood that any
other use by the Recipient of the Materials and Information shall be
subject to Provider’s advance agreement in writing.

Example text 
'''''''''''''

Supply and License: Provider will deliver to Recipient the Materials and
Information. Subject to the terms and conditions of this Materials
Transfer Agreement and its MTD, Provider hereby grants Recipient the
right to use the Materials and Information for the Purpose, during the
Period of Use unless terminated earlier or unless extended by written
mutual agreement of the Parties. It is explicitly understood that any
other use by the Recipient of the Materials and Information shall be
subject to Provider’s advance agreement in writing and will be subject
to applicable authorisations in country of origin of Material (notably
ethical clearance), including with respect to research or any other use
that are not regulated as medical research in the country of the
Recipient or that do not require prior authorization under the
legislation of the country of the Recipient.

Example text 
'''''''''''''

This Agreement records the terms under which the Donor Institution will
make available <details of Material> (the “Material”). The term
“Material” includes all unmodified progeny generated from the material
supplied and that part of all derivatives and the derivative’s progeny
which contains any of the material supplied or its progeny. The
Recipient Institution will hold the Material in trust on the terms of
this Agreement and solely for the purpose of [intended purpose] (“the
Research Project”) within the research group of [Recipient Scientist]
(“the Recipient Scientist”).

Example text 
'''''''''''''

This Agreement records the terms under which the Provider Institution
will make available to the Recipient Institution the Material identified
in [Appendix] (the “Material”). The term “Material” means material,
other than human gametes or embryos, which consists of, or includes
human cells and which is considered “Relevant Material” for the purposes
of [relevant legislation] together with related data. The Recipient
Institution will hold the Material on the terms of this Agreement and
solely for the purpose of [intended purpose] (“the Study”) and as
described in [Appendix], within the research group of [Recipient
Scientist] (“the Recipient Scientist”). The Recipient Institution hereby
agrees to comply and procure that the Recipient Scientist and all
personnel who work with the Material comply with the following terms and
conditions:

Example text 
'''''''''''''

This [agreement] and the attached Implementing Letter (the “Implementing
Letter” and, together with the Agreement) is entered into between the
PROVIDER and the RECIPIENT (or the “Parties”, as further identified in
the [Implementing Letter] and governs the exchange and use of the
certain materials specified in this Agreement between the Parties. The
provisions of this [agreement] shall be given precedence in
interpretation in the event of any conflict between this [agreement] and
the Implementing Letter.

Example text 
'''''''''''''

Provider agrees to transfer to Recipient’s Investigator the following
Research Material: [ ].

Example text 
'''''''''''''

| Recipient acknowledge that this agreement is entered into in order to
  encourage scientific collaboration and exchange of data and material
  in the field of rare diseases.
| NOW IT IS HEREBY AGREED AS FOLLOWS:

Pursuant to Recipient's request that certain research material be made
available for research and/or testing purposes, Provider agrees to
provide to Recipient this biological material under the following terms
and conditions:

Example text 
'''''''''''''

| [biological materials] as defined in [agreement section] of the
  Framework (hereinafter
| “Materials”) transferred from the Provider to the Recipient are
  subject to the provisions
| of this Agreement.

| The Provider or recipient will consider support to the strengthening
  of the laboratory
| and surveillance capacity of the networks of developing countries.

Example text 
'''''''''''''

When it is necessary to transfer samples for storage or other uses from
one organization to another within the country and abroad, the provider
organization holding the samples on behalf of sample sources shall
negotiate an appropriate contract with the recipient organization. This
contract shall be in the form of a Materials Transfer Agreement (MTA).
In order to justify transfer of human materials abroad, researchers,
sponsors and collaborators should demonstrate that in-country capacity
to perform certain types of investigations/testing does not exist or is
inadequate. Samples may be transferred for quality assurance and
laboratory reference purposes. Researchers, sponsors and collaborators
are encouraged to build, develop or strengthen local capacity for any
investigative testing to fulfil the objectives of the proposed research.
All exchanges and transfers (including importation and exportation) of
materials for research purposes shall require clearance from
[regulator], except for exchange of human materials between
organizations within the country. [Regulator] shall maintain a
depositary of all MTAs. Applications for permission to exchange or
transfer human materials for research purposes shall be made to
[regulator]. The application must be accompanied by a MTA.

Example text 
'''''''''''''

[Institution] shall send to the Recipient’s Principal Investigator the
Materials in a manner consistent with the optimum stability and safe
delivery of the Materials.

[Institution] shall provide the Recipient with any protocols that
[Institution] may have concerning the handling, storage and safety of
the Materials.

4. Definitions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Access
^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

“Access right” means rights to use results or background under the terms
and conditions laid down in this Agreement. Unless agreed otherwise,
access rights do not include the right to sub-license. However, any
legal entity that enjoys access rights in order to complete the action
or for research use may authorize another legal entity to exercise those
rights on its behalf, provided that the following conditions are
fulfilled: (a) the legal entity that enjoys access rights is liable for
the acts of the other legal entity as if those acts had been performed
by this former legal entity; (b) access rights granted to the other
legal entity do not include the right to sub-license.

Anonymous
^^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

Stripped of identifying information and of codes that could be used to
link data or samples back to a specific individual. Although anonymous
materials do not by definition contain linking codes, they need not
necessarily be de-identified (as defined below). Note that materials
containing certain demographic information may not be considered
anonymous, depending on the size of the population from which the
materials or data are derived.

Background technology
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

“Background Technology” means any and all products, services, processes,
technologies, materials, software, data and other innovations that are
created by you or a third party prior to or outside of this Project and
that are to be used as part of the Project.

Biospecimen / specimen
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

A Biospecimen is a quantity of tissue, blood, urine, or other
human-derived material.

Commercial purposes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

“COMMERCIAL PURPOSES” means the sale, lease, license, or other transfer
of the MATERIALS or MODIFICATIONS to a for-profit organization.

Example text 
'''''''''''''

COMMERCIAL PURPOSES: The sale, lease, license, or other transfer of the
MATERIAL or MODIFICATIONS to a for-profit organization. COMMERCIAL
PURPOSES shall also include uses of the MATERIAL or MODIFICATIONS by any
organization, including RECIPIENT, to perform contract research, to
screen compound libraries, to produce or manufacture products for
general sale, or to conduct research activities that result in any sale,
lease, license, or transfer of the MATERIAL or MODIFICATIONS to a
for-profit organization. However, industrially sponsored academic
research shall not be considered a use of the MATERIAL or MODIFICATIONS
for COMMERCIAL PURPOSES per se, unless any of the above conditions of
this definition are met.

Confidential Information
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

General Obligations to maintain Confidentiality - During implementation
of the action and for [Number of] years after the period set out in this
agreement, the parties must keep confidential any data, documents or
other material (in any form) that is identified as confidential at the
time it is disclosed (“confidential information”).

Example text 
'''''''''''''

Confidential Information - All technology and know-how disclosed by one
party (the “Disclosing Party”) to another party (the “Receiving Party”)
hereunder (“Confidential Information”) shall be used solely and
exclusively by Receiving Party in a manner consistent with the licenses
granted hereunder and the purposes of this Agreement as stated in the
preamble and recitals hereto; maintained in confidence by the Receiving
Party; and shall not be disclosed to any non-party or used for any
purpose except to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under
this Agreement without the prior written consent of the Disclosing
Party, except to the extent that the Receiving Party can demonstrate by
competent written evidence that such information: (a) is known by the
Receiving Party without obligations of confidentiality at the time of
its receipt and, not through a prior disclosure by the Disclosing Party,
as documented by the Receiving Party’s business records; (b) is in the
public domain other than as a result of any breach of this Agreement by
the Receiving Party; (c) is subsequently disclosed to the Receiving
Party on a non-confidential basis by a third party who may lawfully do
so; or (d) is independently discovered or developed by the Receiving
Party without the use of Confidential Information provided by the
Disclosing Party.

Example text 
'''''''''''''

Master Confidential Disclosure Agreement - Confidential Information
means, (i) all information provided at any [agreement-associated]
Meeting with respect to any aspect of a Project, regardless of whether
or not such information is identified or marked as confidential and
regardless of whether or not a written record is subsequently provided
if the information was provided orally and (ii) all recorded
information, including data marked “Confidential” or bearing a similar
legend.

Data
^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

Data means recorded information used or generated in the performance of
[project].

This agreement defines the following categories of data:

    (i) Standardized Data: all data resulting from an assay after it has
    been defined as a Standardized Assay, which is performed by persons
    or organizations certified to perform;

    (ii) Non-Standardized Data: all data not resulting from Standardized
    Assays other than Comparative Data;

    (iii) Comparative Data: all Data resulting from comparative
    evaluation of Non-Standardized Data or Standardized Data produced by
    a [Member].

    (iv) Comparative Standardized Data: all Data resulting from
    comparative evaluation of Standardized Data produced by a [Member];
    accordingly Comparative Standardized Data is a subset of the
    Comparative Data.

Funded development
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

“Funded Development” means any and all products, services, processes,
technologies, materials, software, data and other innovations (including
modifications, improvements and further developments to Background
Technology) to be created by [grantee] or a third party under this
Project.

Example text 
'''''''''''''

Examples of Funded Developments include, but are not limited to, the
following:

-  Products: compounds, formulations, diagnostics, therapeutics,
   prophylactics, and devices

-  Services: treatments, delivery systems, communications, and
   infrastructure developments

-  Processes: methods, formulae, and algorithms

-  Technologies: platforms, mechanisms, and tools

-  Materials: drawings, analysis, curriculum, guidelines, and policy
   recommendations [4]_

-  Software: code, development kits, and applications

-  Data: [raw or compiled]

-  Other Innovations

Information or Background Information
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

“Information” means the anonymized information relating to the Materials
as supplied by the [Supplier] to Recipient.

Example text 
'''''''''''''

“Background”: any information, techniques, Know-how, software and
materials (regardless of the form or medium in which they are disclosed
or stored) that are provided by one party to another for use in the
Project (whether before or after the date of this Agreement), except any
Result.

Example text 
'''''''''''''

“Background” means any data, know-how or information — whatever its form
or nature (tangible or intangible), including any rights such as
intellectual property rights — that: (a) is held by the beneficiaries
before they acceded to the Agreement, and (b) is needed to implement the
action or exploit the results.”

Intellectual Property Rights
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs): all present and future intellectual
property rights including but not limited to patents, trade and service
marks, design rights, copyright, database rights, trade secrets and
know-how, in all cases whether registered or not or registerable, and
including all registrations and applications for registrations of any of
these and rights to apply for the same as well as any renewals,
extensions, continuations, combinations or divisions thereof, and all
rights and forms of protection of a similar nature or having equivalent
or similar effect to any of these anywhere in the world.

Invention
^^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

“Invention” means any software or new discovery, improvement or
invention, including any Modification, made by the Recipient through the
use of the Materials and/or the Confidential Information

Materials
^^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

“Materials” means all types of tangible chemical, biological and/or
physical materials. (§1 Definition) Materials are transferred for the
performance of the Action from “Providing Beneficiary” to “Recipient
Beneficiary.”

Example text 
'''''''''''''

The term “Material” means material, other than human gametes or embryos,
which consists of, or includes human cells and which is considered
“Relevant Material” for the purposes of the [relevant legislation]
together with related data.

Example text 
'''''''''''''

“ORIGINAL MATERIAL” means the material transferred subject to this
Agreement. A description of the material being transferred will be
specified in an implementing letter.

“MATERIAL” includes ORIGINAL MATERIAL, PROGENY, and UNMODIFIED
DERIVATIVES.

The MATERIAL does not include MODIFICATIONS or other substances created
by the RECIPIENT through the use of the MATERIAL, which are not
MODIFICATIONS, PROGENY, or UNMODIFIED DERIVATIVES.

Example text 
'''''''''''''

Human materials are substances including, but not limited to, blood,
urine, stool, saliva, hair, nail clippings, skin, and any other
associated bio-products obtained from human research participants or
patients or healthy persons.

The materials being transferred/ exchanged must be fully described,
including a description of derivative products, if any. Quantities must
be specified and appropriately packaged.

Modifications
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

“MODIFICATIONS” means substances created by the Recipient that contain
or incorporate the MATERIAL.

Non-profit organizations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION(S): A university or other institution of higher
education or an organization of the type described in section 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 U.S.C. 501(c)) and exempt from
taxation under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C.
501(a)) or any nonprofit scientific or educational organization
qualified under a state nonprofit organization statute. As used herein,
the term also includes government agencies.

Permitted purpose
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

Permitted Purpose: to conduct the [Research Project] in the manner and
timeframe set out in [Annex], subject to the provisions of this MTA.

Progeny
^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

“PROGENY” means unmodified descendant from the MATERIAL, such as virus
from virus, cell from cell, or organism from organism.

Provider
^^^^^^^^

Example text 
'''''''''''''

| “PROVIDER” means the organization providing the ORIGINAL MATERIAL. The
  name and address of this party will be specified in an implementing
  letter.
| “PROVIDER SCIENTIST” The name and address of this party will be
  specified in an implementing letter.

Recipient
^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

| “RECIPIENT” means the organization receiving the ORIGINAL MATERIAL.
  The name and address of this party will be specified in an
  implementing letter.
| “RECIPIENT SCIENTIST” The name and address of this party will be
  specified in an implementing letter.

Example text
''''''''''''

Recipients are all entities that receive [materials] from the
[provider], such as influenza vaccine, diagnostic and pharmaceutical
manufacturers, as well as biotechnology firms, research institutions and
academic institutions. Each recipient shall select options based on its
nature and capacities.

Repository
^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Repository is the physical entity where the Research Materials will be
stored and distributed following the Recipient’s approved processes and
procedures.

Results
^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

“Results” means the results of the work performed by the Recipient,
including but not limited to virus isolates, genetic sequences, data and
information, analyses and conclusions.

Example text
''''''''''''

“Result”: All information, Know-how, results, inventions, software and
other Intellectual Property identified or first reduced to practice or
writing in the course of the Project.

Unmodified derivatives
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

“UNMODIFIED DERIVATIVES” means substances created by the RECIPIENT that
constitute an unmodified functional subunit or product expressed by the
ORIGINAL MATERIAL. Some examples include: subclones of unmodified cell
lines, purified or fractionated subsets of the ORIGINAL MATERIAL,
proteins expressed by DNA/RNA supplied by PROVIDER, or monoclonal
antibodies secreted by a hybridoma cell.

5. Ownership of samples / materials and custodianship
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Example text
''''''''''''

Supply of Material and Data Set(s) - The Supplier may from time to time
provide to the Recipient Material and Data Set(s) and other Confidential
Information pursuant to the terms and conditions of this Agreement.

Example text
''''''''''''

All rights to the Materials and Information shall exclusively be and
remain vested in the supplier. The supplier hereby grants the Recipient
the right to use such Materials and Information for the Purpose (it
being explicitly understood and agreed that any other use shall be
subject to the supplier\`s advance agreement in writing). Recipient will
not claim any rights in respect of such Materials and Information, other
than as explicitly provided herein.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient acknowledges and agrees that the ownership of Materials
and Data Set(s), in particular of Human Biological Material, may be
specifically regulated in the Host Country; such regulations may differ
from those applicable in the country of the Recipient. Without
limitation to the provisions of the preceding sentence, the parties
agree that the Recipient does not obtain any right, title, or interest
in any of the Materials and Data Set(s) furnished by the Supplier.

Example text
''''''''''''

Each Beneficiary shall remain the exclusive owner of its Background.
Participation in the Action shall not affect such ownership rights in
its Background, without prejudice to any rights and obligations under
this Consortium Agreement and the Grant Agreement.

Example text
''''''''''''

Each beneficiary remains free to license, transfer or otherwise dispose
of its ownership rights in Background, subject to any rights and
obligations under this Agreement and the consortium agreement.

Where a beneficiary transfers ownership of Background, it must pass on
its obligations specified under this Agreement and the consortium
agreement, regarding that Background, to the transferee, including the
obligation to pass those obligations on to any subsequent transferee.

A beneficiary may, without the consent of the other beneficiaries but
provided that the other beneficiaries are informed without undue delay
and that the transferee agrees in writing to be bound by this Agreement
and the consortium agreement, transfer its Background to any of the
following: (a) its affiliated entity, (b) any purchaser of all or a
substantial amount of its relevant asset, and (c) any successor entity
resulting from the merger with or consolidation of such a beneficiary.

Example text
''''''''''''

Results are owned by the beneficiary that generates them.

Each beneficiary remains the exclusive owner of its Sideground but a
different allocation of ownership may be agreed upon in the consortium
agreement.

Unless otherwise specified herein, each Beneficiary remains the
exclusive owner of its [Results]. Beneficiaries are not required to
grant any Access Rights to [Results].

Two or more beneficiaries own results jointly if: (a) they have jointly
generated them and (b) it is not possible to (i) establish the
respective contribution of each beneficiary, or (ii) separate them for
the purpose of applying for, obtaining or maintaining their protection.

The joint owners must agree (in writing) on the allocation and terms of
exercise of their joint ownership, to ensure compliance with their
obligations under this Agreement.

Unless otherwise agreed in the joint ownership agreement, each joint
owner may grant non-exclusive licenses to third parties to exploit
jointly-owned results (without any right to sub-license), if the other
joint owners are given: (a) at least 45 days advance notice and (b) fair
and reasonable compensation.

Option 1: Beneficiaries may agree here that ownership of certain
Results, once said Results have been generated, shall be transferred
from the initial owner to another Beneficiary.

Option 2: Beneficiaries may agree here that where Results have been
generated by one Beneficiary as a result of a cash contribution from
another Beneficiary, these Results would be transferred to that second
Beneficiary.

Unless otherwise agreed in the joint ownership agreement in the case of
joint ownership of Results, each Co-Owner is granted a non-exclusive,
world-wide, fully paid up, royalty-free, perpetual, irrevocable licence
to use the jointly owned Results for Research Use, including the right
to grant non-exclusive sub-licences to its Affiliated Entities and to
Third Parties without the need to inform the other Co-Owners. Each
Co-Owner and its Affiliated Entities shall have a license to use for
Direct Exploitation the jointly owned Results, including the right to
grant non-exclusive licences subject to the following conditions
[different terms can be inserted].

Each Beneficiary remains free to transfer its ownership rights in
Results.

Where a Beneficiary transfers ownership of Results, it must pass on its
obligations specified under the Grant Agreement and the Consortium
Agreement to the transferee.

Unless agreed otherwise (in writing) for specifically-identified Third
Parties or unless impossible under applicable laws on mergers and
acquisitions, a Beneficiary that intends to transfer ownership of
Results must give at least forty-five (45) Days’ notice to the other
Beneficiaries that still have (or still may request) Access Rights to
the Results. This notification must include sufficient information on
the new owner to enable any Beneficiary concerned to assess the effects
on its Access Rights.

Unless agreed otherwise (in writing), any other Beneficiary may object
within thirty (30) Days of receiving the notification if it can show
that the transfer would adversely affect its Access Rights. In this
case, the transfer may not take place until an agreement has been
reached between the Beneficiaries concerned.

Notwithstanding the above, a Beneficiary may, without the consent of the
other Beneficiaries but provided that the other Beneficiaries are
informed [within sixty (60) Days] from the date of transfer and that the
transferee agrees in writing to be bound by the Grant Agreement and the
Consortium Agreement, transfer its Results to any of the following: a)
its Affiliated Entity, b) any purchaser of all or a substantial amount
of its relevant assets, and c) any successor entity resulting from the
merger with or consolidation of such a Beneficiary.

Provided that any Access Right to the Results can be exercised
(requested and granted) and that any additional obligations under the
Grant Agreement or the Consortium Agreement are complied with by the
Beneficiary who owns Results, each Beneficiary may license its own
Results to any legal entity as it deems fit.

Example text
''''''''''''

The foundation’s approach has been to not take ownership in technologies
created with its funds, although it’s possible that the foundation may
take limited residual (march-in) rights if during the due diligence
process it determines that such rights are necessary to ensure the
achievement of the strategic objectives toward Global Access; provided,
however, if such rights are sought, they will be expressly described in
either the body of the grant agreement or the project’s underlying
collaborative documentation.

Example text
''''''''''''

The RECIPIENT agrees to provide appropriate acknowledgement of the
source of the MATERIAL as requested by the PROVIDER. Any request for
attribution will be specified in the Implementing Letter.

Example text
''''''''''''

1.The PROVIDER retains ownership of the MATERIAL, including any MATERIAL
contained or incorporated in MODIFICATIONS.

2.The RECIPIENT retains ownership of: (a) MODIFICATIONS (except that,
the PROVIDER retains ownership rights to the MATERIAL included therein),
and (b) those substances created through the use of the MATERIAL or
MODIFICATIONS, but which are not PROGENY, UNMODIFIED DERIVATIVES or
MODIFICATIONS (i.e., do not contain the ORIGINAL MATERIAL, PROGENY,
UNMODIFIED DERIVATIVES). If either 2 (a) or 2 (b) results from the
collaborative efforts of the PROVIDER and the RECIPIENT, joint ownership
may be negotiated.

Example text
''''''''''''

This Research Material represents a significant investment on the part
of Provider and is considered proprietary to Provider. Recipient’s
Investigator therefore agrees to retain control over this Research
Material and further agrees not to transfer the Research Material to
other people not under her or his direct supervision without advance
written approval of Provider. Provider reserves the right to distribute
the Research Material to others and to use it for its own purposes.

Example text
''''''''''''

Within sixty (60) days from the date of this Agreement above, Provider
shall provide Recipient with samples of the Biological Material, in good
condition along with associated information and data developed by
Provider as appropriate. The samples shall be sent to the attention of:
……………., or his designee, at Recipient’s site; …………………. (address of the
site for delivery). All custodianship of the Biological Material will
pass to Recipient from the point of delivery of the sample to the
Recipient’ site. Recipient will then be responsible for its use, storage
and disposal for the term of the Agreement. Recipient agrees not to take
or send the Biological Material to any other location or to a third
party without advance written approval of Provider.

Example text
''''''''''''

Sample sources own the samples. Samples sources may withdraw their
samples if the samples are linked. Samples shall be held in trust on
behalf of the sample sources by a duly registered and recognized
organization in [country]. The organization entrusted with custodianship
of the samples shall have the authority to decide use, transfer, storage
and future use of the samples taking into consideration rights and
welfare of the research participants.

6. Use
~~~~~~

Example text
''''''''''''

Unless with the prior written approval of Provider (whose approval may
be withheld at its sole discretion) or unless expressly permitted by the
terms of a separate written agreement entered into between the Parties,
Recipient agrees that the Material and Information will not be used for
any purpose other than the Purpose and will be used only by Recipient at
Recipient’s organization.

Example text
''''''''''''

Recipient’s Personnel: Recipient will limit provision and disclosure of
Material and Information to those directors, officers, employees and
consultants of Recipient who need to know or need to use the Material or
Information in order to assist Recipient in carrying out the Purpose.
The Recipient will ensure that Recipient’s directors, officers,
employees, and consultants as aforesaid shall be bound by similar
obligations of confidentiality and restrictions on use as contained in
this Agreement.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Material may only be used by those under the Recipient Scientist’s
direct supervision in the Recipient Institution’s laboratories under
suitable containment conditions, and in compliance with all applicable
statutes and regulations. The material may not be used in human subjects
or for clinical or diagnostic purposes.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient Institution will not use the Material for administration
to human subjects or human application as that term is defined in the
[relevant legislation] (or equivalent as each may be replaced or amended
from time to time), or for clinical or diagnostic purposes.

The Recipient Institution may use the Material for the purposes of the
Study and as described in [Appendix], from the date of receipt of the
Material. The Recipient Institution will comply fully with all
applicable environmental, health and safety laws, the [relevant
legislation] and other Applicable Laws with respect to its use
(including, but not limited to, disposal or return).

Example text
''''''''''''

The RECIPIENT shall use, store, and dispose of the MATERIAL and any
MODIFICATIONS in accordance with good laboratory practice and shall
ensure compliance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations,
including laws, rules, and regulations governing export control and
safety.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient Institution will not transfer the Material to any other
body, or permit its use within the Recipient Institution other than by
the Recipient Scientist’s research group, without (in each case) prior
written consent from the Donor Institution. The Material may not be used
by the Recipient Scientist in research which is subject to the provision
of any rights to a commercial third party without prior written consent.

Example text
''''''''''''

The RECIPIENT and the RECIPIENT SCIENTIST agree that the MATERIAL:

    | a) is to be used solely for teaching and academic research
      purposes;
    | b) will not be used in human subjects, in clinical trials, or for
      diagnostic purposes involving human subjects without the written
      consent of the PROVIDER;
    | c) is to be used only at the RECIPIENT organization and only in
      the RECIPIENT SCIENTIST's laboratory under the direction of the
      RECIPIENT SCIENTIST or others working under his/her direct
      supervision; and
    | d) will not be transferred to anyone else within the RECIPIENT
      organization without the prior written consent of the PROVIDER.

Example text
''''''''''''

This research material may not be used in human subjects. The Research
Material will only be used for research purposes by Recipient’s
Investigator in his/her laboratory, for the research project described
below, under suitable containment conditions. This Research Material
will not be used for commercial purposes such as screening, production
or sale, for which a commercialization license may be required.
Recipient agrees to comply with all Federal rules and regulations
applicable to the Research Project and the handling of the Research
Material.

This Research Material will be used by Recipient’s Investigator solely
in connection with the following research project (“Research Project”)
described with specificity as follows (use an attachment page if
necessary):

Example text
''''''''''''

Recipient hereby accepts, upon the terms and conditions herein
specified, the custodianship of the Biological Material to enable
Recipient to use the Biological Material for the sole purpose of
conducting experimental research to the exclusion of any commercial use
of the Biological Material. The experimental research conducted by
Recipient with the Biological Material, hereinafter the “Research”, is
described in [clause].

Example text
''''''''''''

The recipient should fully describe the intended use of the materials.
The recipient should also specify whether the materials would be used
for research purposes only or for commercial applications or both.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient shall ensure that the Materials are:

-  used only for the purposes of the Investigation and not for
   administration to human subjects;

-  handled and stored in accordance with any reasonable protocols
   provided to the Recipient pursuant to [Clause];

-  not made available to anyone other than personnel of the Recipient
   engaged in carrying out the Investigation.

Restrictions on access to information or background information
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

During the action, the beneficiary enjoys access right to the background
of the other beneficiaries, solely for the purpose and to the extent
necessary for undertaking and completing the action. Such access must be
granted on a royalty-free basis.

During and after completion of the action, beneficiaries and their
affiliated entities enjoy (unless prevented or restricted from doing so
by obligations to others which exist at the date of accession to this
Agreement) access rights to the background of the other beneficiaries,
only to the extent reasonably required for the purpose of the research
use of results.

Restrictions on access to results
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Access Rights for Implementation: During the Action, the Beneficiaries
enjoy Access Rights to the Results of the other Beneficiaries, solely
for the purpose and to the extent necessary for undertaking and
completing the Action. Such Access Rights are granted under Royalty-Free
Condition.

Confidentiality
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Recipient shall take all reasonable measures to keep the Materials and
Information confidential and shall only use such Materials and
Information for the Purpose. Disclosure shall be made only to those
persons who have a need to know such Confidential Information for the
aforesaid Purpose (as described herein), and who are bound by similar
obligations of confidentiality and restrictions on use as contained
herein.

Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, there shall be no obligations of
confidentiality or restrictions on use if and to the extent the
Recipient can demonstrate through competent evidence that:

    1. the Materials or Information are publicly available, or become
    publicly available otherwise than by action of the Recipient; or

    2. the Materials or Information were already known to the Recipient
    (as evidenced by its written records) prior to its receipt
    hereunder; or

    3. the Materials or Information were received, without an obligation
    of confidentiality, from a third Party not in breach of an
    obligation of confidentiality, or

    4. the Recipient is required to disclose the Materials or
    Information in order to comply with applicable laws or regulations
    or with an order of a competent court or public authority, provided
    that the Recipient will in such event promptly notify the Provider
    in writing of such obligation and shall provide adequate opportunity
    to the Provider to object to, or restrict, such disclosure or
    request confidential treatment thereof.

The obligations of confidentiality and restrictions on use set forth
herein shall survive the expiration or termination of this Agreement.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient shall hold and maintain in confidence all Confidential
Information. In this connection, the Recipient shall: (i) take all
reasonable measures to keep such Confidential Information confidential,
including taking such action as may be appropriate to prevent the
unauthorized access, use or disclosure of the Confidential Information;
(ii) use the Confidential Information solely for carrying out the
Project and only to the extent that is reasonably necessary to achieve
the Project objectives and not for any other purpose. (Any other use or
transfer to any Third Party (other than Representatives pursuant to
[Section] below) of the Material and Data Set(s) or the other
Confidential Information by the Recipient requires the prior and written
approval of the Supplier and, as required by applicable laws, the
competent authorities in the Host Country.); and (iii) only disclose the
Confidential Information to those persons who have a need to know or are
authorized to receive the Confidential Information under the terms of
this Agreement, and who are bound by similar obligations of
confidentiality and restrictions on use as contained herein.

In addition, the Recipient acknowledges and agrees that the use or
transfer of Material and Data Set(s) or the other Confidential
Information may require the prior authorization of competent authorities
in the Host Country, including with respect to Project that are not
regulated as medical research in the country of the Recipient or that do
not require prior authorization under the legislation of the country of
the Recipient. Supplier shall use reasonable efforts to obtain any
required authorizations as needed for the Project prior to sending
Material and Data Set(s) or other Confidential Information to Recipient
or Recipient’s designated subcontractor for the Project. Without
limitation to the provisions of the preceding sentences, the Recipient
agrees not to use or store the Material and Data Sets at any facility
outside of the control of the Recipient unless authorized by Supplier.

The Recipient shall only authorize access to the Confidential
Information to its Representatives whose knowledge is necessary to
enable the Recipient to carry out the Project, and shall guarantee that
such use by its Representatives shall be consistent with the assurances
and obligations set forth in this Agreement. Prior to disclosing any
Confidential Information to any of its Representatives, the Recipient
shall obtain their written agreement and undertaking to maintain and
preserve the confidentiality of the Confidential Information and to
comply with each of the terms and provisions of the Agreement.

Unless different period is stipulated by the Supplier, the obligations
of this [Article] shall continue for a period of ten years after the
expiration or termination of this Agreement.

The Recipient shall promptly report in writing to the Supplier any use
or disclosure of the Confidential Information not provided for by this
Agreement of which it becomes aware. The Supplier in its sole discretion
may require the Recipient to: (a) promptly investigate and respond to
the Supplier’s concerns regarding any alleged disclosure; (b) promptly
resolve any problems identified by the investigation; (c) submit a
corrective action plan with steps designed to prevent any future
unauthorized disclosures; and/or (d) require that all Material, Data
Set(s) and other Confidential Information (including any document
created by or on behalf of Recipient and containing Confidential
Information) be immediately returned or destroyed.

Example text
''''''''''''

Confidentiality Obligation - Without prejudice to any obligations of
confidentiality in the Funding Conditions, none of the parties will
either during the Project Period or for [Number of] years after the end
of the Project Period, disclose to any third party nor use for any
purpose, except carrying out the Project, any other party's Confidential
Information.

Request for Disclosure under Freedom of Information Act - If any party
that is subject to the [Freedom of Information Act] receives a request
under that Act to disclose any information that, under this Agreement,
is the Confidential Information of another party, it will notify that
other party and will consult with it promptly and before making any
disclosure under that Act. That other party will respond to party that
received the request within [Number of] Business Days after receiving
the notice, providing information to assist the party that received the
request to determine whether or not an exemption to the Freedom of
Information Act applies to the information requested under that Act.

Exceptions to Confidentiality Obligations - None of the parties will be
in breach of any obligation to keep any Background or other information
confidential or not to disclose it to any other party to the extent that
it:

    (i) is known to the party making the disclosure before its receipt
    in connection with the Project, and not already subject to any
    obligation of confidentiality to another party;

    (ii) is or becomes publicly known without any breach of this
    Agreement or any other undertaking to keep it confidential;

    (iii) has been obtained by the party making the disclosure from a
    third party in circumstances where the party making the disclosure
    has no reason to believe that there has been a breach of an
    obligation of confidentiality;

    (iv) has been independently developed by the party making the
    disclosure; or

    (v) is disclosed pursuant to the requirement of any law or
    regulation (provided, in the case of a disclosure under the [Freedom
    of Information Act], none of the exceptions to that Act applies to
    the information disclosed) or the order of any Court of competent
    jurisdiction, and the party required to make that disclosure has
    informed the party whose information it is, within a reasonable time
    after being required to make the disclosure, of the requirement to
    make the disclosure and the information required to be disclosed; or

    (vi) is approved for release in writing by an authorized
    representative of the party whose information it is.

None of the parties will be in breach of any obligation to keep any
Background that is not Confidential Information or other information,
confidential or not to disclose them to any third party by:

    (i) Publishing it if it has followed the procedure in the clause on
    Academic Publication and has received no Confidentiality Notice
    within the period stated in that clause; or

    (ii) disclosing it to the Funding Body in accordance with the
    Funding Conditions.

None of the parties will be in breach of any obligation to keep another
party’s Background, or other information, confidential or not to
disclose them to any third party, by making them available to [any Group
Company or any person working for or on its behalf or on behalf of a
Group Company], who needs to know the same in order to exercise the
rights granted provided they are not used except as expressly permitted
by this Agreement and the recipient undertakes to keep that Background
or that information confidential.

Example text
''''''''''''

Confidentiality of Licensee Information - If required by a License
Agreement, each Party will, to the extent permitted by law, keep
confidential the terms of such License Agreement and any business
information received from the Licensee (e.g., revenues, business
development reports, milestones accomplished, sub-licensee information
and sublicense agreements), except that a Party may report revenue it
receives in accordance with its reporting requirements to sponsors and
may include such revenue in aggregate licensing revenue reported by such
Party.

Example text
''''''''''''

General Obligations to maintain Confidentiality - During implementation
of the action and for [Number of] years after the period set out in this
agreement, the parties must keep confidential any data, documents or
other material (in any form) that is identified as confidential at the
time it is disclosed (“confidential information”).

If a [recipient] requests, [donor] may agree to keep such information
confidential for an additional period beyond the initial four years.

If information has been identified as confidential only orally, it will
be considered to be confidential only if this is confirmed in writing
within 15 days of the oral disclosure.

Unless otherwise agreed between the parties, they may use confidential
information only to implement the Agreement.

The beneficiaries may disclose confidential information to their
personnel or third parties involved in the action only if they: (a) need
to know to implement the Agreement and (b) are bound by an obligation of
confidentiality.

The [recipient] may disclose confidential information to its staff,
other [member] institutions and bodies or third parties, if: (a) this is
necessary to implement the Agreement or safeguard the [recipient’s]
financial interests and (b) the recipients of the information are bound
by an obligation of confidentiality.

Unless otherwise agreed between the Parties, they may use Confidential
Information only to implement this [agreement]. No Confidential
Information of the Disclosing Beneficiary may be used by the Receiving
Beneficiary for any purpose other than the performance of the Receiving
Beneficiary’s obligations or the exercise of the Receiving Beneficiary’s
rights under this Consortium Agreement.

The Beneficiaries may disclose Confidential Information to their
personnel, other individuals under the supervision and control of the
Receiving Beneficiary, Affiliated Entities, Linked Third Parties,
Associated Partners and/or Sub-Contractors involved in the Action only
if they: (i) need to know the Confidential Information to implement this
Consortium Agreement or the Action, and (ii) are bound by obligations of
confidentiality at least equivalent to those set forth herein. Any
disclosure of Confidential Information by the Receiving Beneficiary to
other Third Parties requires the prior written consent of the Disclosing
Beneficiary. The Receiving Beneficiary must use all reasonable endeavors
to ensure that persons and/or entities receiving Confidential
Information from it do not disclose such Confidential Information. The
Receiving Beneficiary shall be responsible to the Disclosing Beneficiary
for any disclosure by any such personnel, Affiliated Entities, Linked
Third Parties, Associated Partners, Sub-Contractors and Third Parties,
which violates the terms of this Consortium Agreement.

The Receiving Beneficiary shall return to the Disclosing Beneficiary all
documents or other materials containing any of the Disclosing
Beneficiary’s Confidential Information, which are in its possession,
power or control or in the possession, power or control of its
personnel, other individuals under the supervision and control of the
Receiving Beneficiary, Affiliated Entities, Linked Third Parties,
Associated Partners and/or Sub-Contractors involved in the Action who
have received such Confidential Information from the Receiving
Beneficiary pursuant to this Clause, whenever requested to do so by the
Disclosing Beneficiary, and where such Confidential Information is not
required by the Receiving Beneficiary for the use or exercise of (i)
Access Rights for completing the Action or (ii) other rights or licenses
under this Consortium Agreement. The return or destruction of
Confidential Information will not affect the Receiving Beneficiary’s
obligation to observe the confidentiality and non-use restrictions in
respect of the Disclosing Beneficiary’s Confidential Information set out
in this Consortium Agreement. The Beneficiary shall be entitled to keep
one (1) copy of the Confidential Information in a secure place for the
purpose of evidence. The provisions of this Clause shall not apply to
copies of electronically exchanged Confidential Information made as a
matter of routine information technology backup and to Confidential
Information or copies thereof which must be stored by the Receiving
Beneficiary according to provisions of mandatory law.

Example text
''''''''''''

Confidential Information - All technology and know-how disclosed by one
party (the “Disclosing Party”) to another party (the “Receiving Party”)
hereunder (“Confidential Information”) shall be used solely and
exclusively by Receiving Party in a manner consistent with the licenses
granted hereunder and the purposes of this Agreement as stated in the
preamble and recitals hereto; maintained in confidence by the Receiving
Party; and shall not be disclosed to any non-party or used for any
purpose except to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under
this Agreement without the prior written consent of the Disclosing
Party, except to the extent that the Receiving Party can demonstrate by
competent written evidence that such information: (a) is known by the
Receiving Party without obligations of confidentiality at the time of
its receipt and, not through a prior disclosure by the Disclosing Party,
as documented by the Receiving Party’s business records; (b) is in the
public domain other than as a result of any breach of this Agreement by
the Receiving Party; (c) is subsequently disclosed to the Receiving
Party on a non-confidential basis by a third party who may lawfully do
so; or (d) is independently discovered or developed by the Receiving
Party without the use of Confidential Information provided by the
Disclosing Party.

Example text
''''''''''''

Master Confidential Disclosure Agreement - Confidential Information
means, (i) all information provided at any [agreement-associated]
Meeting with respect to any aspect of a Project, regardless of whether
or not such information is identified or marked as confidential and
regardless of whether or not a written record is subsequently provided
if the information was provided orally and (ii) all recorded
information, including data marked “Confidential” or bearing a similar
legend.

Confidential Information (as defined in the Master CDA), including but
not limited to Data, that is shared between [those named in the
agreement] will be held in confidence according to the terms of a
[Master CDA].

Confidentiality Obligations - Each [Member], as a Receiving Party,
agrees that it will:

    (a) Use the Confidential Information received from a Disclosing
    Party solely for the Purpose (defined as “carrying out their own
    activities within the corresponding [Projects]”),

    (b) Treat the Confidential Information with reasonable care to avoid
    disclosure of the Confidential Information to any third party,
    person, firm or corporation other than as expressly stated herein,
    and

    (c) Except to the extent prohibited or, where applicable, to the
    extent authorized by law, be liable for use of the Disclosing
    Party's Confidential Information outside the scope of the Purpose as
    well as for any unauthorized disclosure directly resulting from
    their failure to exercise such reasonable care.

Disclosure to Employees and Affiliates - Each Receiving Party shall be
entitled to disclose the Disclosing Party's Confidential Information to
its employees and the employees of its Affiliates (as defined below) as
well as its agents and consultants who are bound by confidentiality and
restricted use obligations no less strict than those set out herein.
However, each Receiving Party shall only disclose the Disclosing Party's
Confidential Information to those of its employees, agents, consultants
and Affiliates who shall reasonably need to know such Confidential
Information in order to evaluate such Confidential Information for the
Purpose and/or to make decisions or render advice in connection with the
Purpose and who shall be informed of the existence of this Master CDA
and shall agree in writing or via employment policy to be bound by the
terms hereof or be otherwise bound by law not to disclose such
Confidential Information. Each Receiving Party shall be responsible for
ensuring that its employees, agents and consultants of its Affiliates,
and its consultants who receive Confidential Information comply with the
terms of this Master CDA.

Exceptions - Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Master
CDA, the Receiving Party shall have no obligation with respect to the
Confidential Information received from a Disclosing Party to the extent
such information is:

    (a) Already known by the Receiving Party at the time of disclosure
    as can be demonstrated by competent proof;

    (b) Publicly known, or subsequently becomes publicly known, without
    the wrongful act or breach of this Master CDA by the Receiving
    Party;

    (c) Rightfully received by the Receiving Party from a third party
    having the lawful right to make such a disclosure, where said
    disclosure is rightfully made without an express obligation of
    confidence;

    (d) Approved for release or disclosure by written authorization of
    the Disclosing Party;

    (e) Independently developed by the employees or agents of the
    Receiving Party without the use or knowledge of the Confidential
    Information provided by the Disclosing Party as can be demonstrated
    by competent proof; or

    (f) Required to be disclosed pursuant to any competent judicial or
    government request, requirement or order, provided that the
    Receiving Party so disclosing takes reasonable steps to provide the
    Disclosing Party with sufficient prior notice in order to allow the
    Disclosing Party to contest such request, requirement or order and
    provided that such Confidential Information is disclosed only
    subject to reasonably available restrictions on further disclosure
    and use, and otherwise remains subject to the obligations of
    confidentiality and restricted use set forth in this Master CDA.

Example text
''''''''''''

General Obligations to maintain Confidentiality - The confidentiality
obligations no longer apply if: (a) the disclosing party agrees to
release the other party; (b) the information was already known by the
recipient or is given to him without obligation of confidentiality by a
third party that was not bound by any obligation of confidentiality; (c)
the recipient proves that the information was developed without the use
of confidential information; (d) the information becomes generally and
publicly available, without breaching any confidentiality obligation, or
(e) the disclosure of the information is required by law.

The confidentiality obligations under this Clause does not apply if: (a)
the Disclosing Beneficiary agrees in writing that it no longer considers
the Confidential Information as protected by the terms of this Clause
(b) the Confidential Information was already known by the Receiving
Beneficiary or any of its Affiliated Entities, Linked Third Parties,
Associated Partners and/or Sub-Contractors or is given to such parties
by a Third Party without obligation of confidentiality to the extent
such Third Party was not bound by any obligation of confidentiality with
respect to such Confidential Information; (c) the Receiving Beneficiary
proves that the information was developed independently by the Receiving
Beneficiary or its Affiliated Entity, Linked Third Parties, Associated
Partners and/or Sub-Contractors without the use of Confidential
Information; (d) at the time of disclosure, the Confidential Information
is or after such disclosure becomes generally and publicly available,
without breaching any confidentiality obligation by the Receiving
Beneficiary; (e) Disclosure of Confidential Information shall be
permitted if the Receiving Beneficiary is required to do so by or in
connection with any laws, regulations or legal processing, or court of
competent jurisdiction, provided that such disclosure is subject to all
applicable governmental, regulatory or judicial protection available and
immediate written notice of such requirement is given to the Disclosing
Beneficiary with a view to agreeing the timing and the content of such
disclosure. The same shall apply in case a disclosure of Confidential
Information to a patent office or equivalent supervisory required for
the purposes of obtaining patent protection, provided, that the
Beneficiary opting for patent or similar protection must give prior
written notice to the Disclosing Beneficiary with a view to agreeing the
timing and the content of such disclosure.

Example text
''''''''''''

Prior to the transfer of the Biological Material to Recipient, Provider
will ensure that the samples are either coded or anonymised, so that
under no circumstances will Recipient be supplied with the identity of
the patient, or any basic clinical information, that in Provider’s
opinion could identify the patient.

Example text
''''''''''''

| To the extent permitted by law, Recipient agrees to treat in
  confidence, for a period of three (3) years from the date of its
  disclosure, any of Provider’s written information about this Research
  Material that is stamped “CONFIDENTIAL,” except for information that
  was previously known to Recipient or that is or becomes publicly
  available or which is disclosed to Recipient without a confidentiality
  obligation. Any oral disclosures from Provider to Recipient shall be
  identified as being CONFIDENTIAL by notice delivered to Recipient
  within ten (10) days after the
| date of the oral disclosure. Recipient may publish or otherwise
  publicly disclose the results of the Research Project, but if Provider
  has given CONFIDENTIAL information to Recipient such public disclosure
  may be made only after Provider has had thirty (30) days to review the
  proposed disclosure to determine if it includes any CONFIDENTIAL
  information, except when a shortened time period under court order or
  the Freedom of Information Act pertains.

Example text
''''''''''''

Each of Recipient and Provider undertakes to retain in confidence and
not disclose to any third party any confidential information and samples
received from the other party. Such information may, however, be
disclosed insofar as such disclosure is necessary to allow a party, or
its employees to defend against litigation, to file and prosecute patent
applications, or to comply with governmental regulations. Such
obligation of confidentiality shall be waived as to information and
samples which (i) is in the public domain; (ii) comes into the public
domain through no fault of the receiving party; (iii) was known prior to
its disclosure by the receiving party, as evidenced by written records;
or (iv) is disclosed to the receiving party by a third party having a
lawful right to make such disclosure. Such obligations of
confidentiality shall continue for five (5) years from the completion or
termination of the Research.

Example text
''''''''''''

4.1 The Recipient shall keep confidential any confidential information
relating to the Materials that is disclosed to it by Sanger pursuant to
this Agreement. The Recipient shall only use such information for the
purposes of the Investigation and shall not disclose it to any person
other than personnel of the Recipient engaged in carrying out the
Investigation.

Clause 4.1 shall not apply to any information that:

-  is published by and/or is contained in any publication which Sanger
   has published or becomes public knowledge other than through breach
   of this Agreement; or

-  is independently developed by the Recipient or acquired from a third
   Party, to the extent that it is acquired with the right to disclose
   it; or

-  was lawfully in the possession of the Recipient prior to the date of
   this Agreement; or

-  is required to be disclosed by law or any court of competent
   jurisdiction, any tax or regulatory authority or any binding
   judgement, order or requirement of any other competent authority,
   provided that the Recipient shall inform Sanger where possible prior
   to any such disclosure.

7. Further use, transport out of country, storage and destruction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Expectation for further use
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Each beneficiary must — up to four years after the period set out in
[agreement] — take measures aiming to ensure “exploitation” of its
results (either directly or indirectly, in particular through transfer
or licensing) by: (a) using them in further research activities (outside
the action); (b) developing, creating or marketing a product or process;
(c) creating and providing a service, or (d) using them in
standardization activities.

Example text
''''''''''''

The RECIPIENT may distribute the MATERIAL and substances created by the
RECIPIENT through use of the MATERIAL, including PROGENY, UNMODIFIED
DERIVATIVES, and MODIFICATIONS, without requesting consent from the
PROVIDER. RECIPIENT agrees to notify the PROVIDER of any distributions
of the MATERIAL to third parties as requested by the PROVIDER. Any
request for notification will be specified in the Implementing Letter.

Example text
''''''''''''

The RECIPIENT and/or the RECIPIENT SCIENTIST shall have the right,
without restriction, to distribute substances created by the RECIPIENT
through the use of the ORIGINAL MATERIAL only if those substances are
not PROGENY, UNMODIFIED DERIVATIVES, or MODIFICATIONS.

Under a separate implementing letter to this Agreement (or an agreement
at least as protective of the PROVIDER's rights), the RECIPIENT may
distribute MODIFICATIONS to NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION(S) for research and
teaching purposes only.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Provider agrees to the onward transfer and use of the Materials, to
all members of the [network], on the same terms and conditions as those
provided in Standard Material Transfer Agreement within the [network].

The Provider consents to the onward transfer and use of the Materials to
entities outside the [network] on the condition that the prospective
recipient has concluded a Standard Material Transfer Agreement outside
the [network].

The Provider shall inform the [designated point] of shipments of
Materials to entities inside/outside the [network] by recording in the
[database].

Example text
''''''''''''

The recipient shall only further transfer the [biological materials] if
the prospective recipient has concluded an SMTA with the [network].

Any such further transfer shall be reported to the [designated point].

The [authorised individual] may, under exceptional circumstances, allow
the [biological materials] to be transferred to a prospective recipient
while requesting this aforementioned recipient to enter into an
[agreement], and report to the “Advisory Group” accordingly.

| The recipient may exchange [biological materials] with any other
  holder of
| an [agreement] concluded with the [network].

Example text
''''''''''''

The provider organization should clearly state whether the recipient
organization is allowed to own any derivatives of the material developed
over time. The provider organization may allow the recipient
organization to retain the derivatives without any stipulations.

The MTA must state who owns any new products discovered through the use
of the material. If nothing is stated about this in the MTA, the
provider organization automatically assumes ownership.

Restrictions on future use
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Upon expiration or earlier termination of the Period of Use, Recipient
will cease all use of the Material and Information, and will destroy any
remaining Material.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient Institution agrees to obtain the written consent of the
Provider Institution if there is any material change to the proposed use
of the Material in the Study as described in [Appendix].

Example text 
'''''''''''''

The Materials shall be used solely for performance of the Action in
accordance with this Consortium Agreement. The Recipient Beneficiary
needs to have all the required authorizations under all applicable laws
and regulations to perform the Allocated Work using the Materials. The
Materials shall be used in full compliance with all applicable laws and
regulations. The Materials shall not be analysed or modified except as
necessary for the purpose of the Action.

The Materials shall not be transferred or made available to any
individual other than those under the supervision and control of the
Recipient Beneficiary, its Affiliated Entities, Linked Third Parties,
Associated Partners and/or Sub-Contractors. Upon completion of the
Action, or the expiry or termination of this Consortium Agreement, any
unused Materials will be either returned to the Providing Beneficiary,
which made them available, or disposed of/destroyed in accordance with
all applicable laws and regulations and provide Providing Beneficiary
with a written confirmation of such disposal or destruction.

All Materials are transferred with no warranties, express or implied, of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose or otherwise. In
particular, no Providing Beneficiary represents or warrants that the use
of the Materials will not infringe or violate any patent or proprietary
rights of Third Parties.

To exercise access right, this must first be requested in writing.

Example text
''''''''''''

Authorized Use and Access of Material and Data Set(s) and Other
Confidential Information - The Recipient shall hold and maintain in
confidence all Confidential Information. In this connection, the
Recipient shall: (i) take all reasonable measures to keep such
Confidential Information confidential, including taking such action as
may be appropriate to prevent the unauthorized access, use or disclosure
of the Confidential Information; (ii) use the Confidential Information
solely for carrying out the Project and only to the extent that is
reasonably necessary to achieve the Project objectives and not for any
other purpose. (Any other use or transfer to any Third Party (other than
Representatives pursuant to Section 3.3 below) of the Material and Data
Set(s) or the other Confidential Information by the Recipient requires
the prior and written approval of the Supplier and, as required by
applicable laws, the competent authorities in the Host Country.); and
(iii) only disclose the Confidential Information to those persons who
have a need to know or are authorized to receive the Confidential
Information under the terms of this Agreement, and who are bound by
similar obligations of confidentiality and restrictions on use as
contained herein.

Example text
''''''''''''

If there are specific restrictions for the recipient organization, they
should be [guidance] described. Specific restrictions may, for example,
include: to be used for one purpose and not the other; to be used in a
specific site or country only or to be used strictly under the laws of a
specific country. It should, however, be noted that any research project
to be conducted in future using stored samples of human origin will be
subject to review and approval by a Research Ethics Committee in the
provider’s country.

Continued access for research use
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Access Rights for purpose of Research Use of Results: During and after
completion of the Action, Beneficiaries and their Affiliated Entities
enjoy Access Rights to the Background of the other Beneficiaries, only
to the extent reasonably required for the purpose of the Research Use of
Results. The parties can indicate the choice of Royalty-Free condition
or Fair and Reasonable Conditions other than Royalty Free condition.

Continued access for commercial development 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Access Rights for Direct Exploitation: Beneficiaries are not required to
grant Access Rights for Direct Exploitation to their Background and may
use, exploit, sublicense or otherwise commercialize their Background as
they see fit, subject to the Access Rights granted for implementation as
set forth in [Clause] and for Research Use as set forth in [Clauses]. In
the event that Direct Exploitation of Results by a Beneficiary requires
Background of another Beneficiary necessary to use such Results the
Access Rights to such Background may be negotiated between the
Beneficiary owning such Background and the Beneficiaries involved.

Example text
''''''''''''

Nothing in this Agreement grants the Recipient Institution any rights
over the Material (other than as specifically granted by this Agreement)
or under any patents, nor any right to use, or permit the use of, any
products or processes containing, using, or directly derived from the
Material for profit making or commercial purposes (“Commercial Use”). If
the Recipient Institution wishes to make Commercial Use of the Material
or a product directly derived from the Material it agrees to negotiate
in good faith with the Donor Institution or its representative for the
grant of an appropriate licence or the conclusion of a revenue sharing
agreement, if justified. The Donor Institution will have no obligation
to grant a licence.

Example text
''''''''''''

Without written consent from the PROVIDER, the RECIPIENT and/or the
RECIPIENT SCIENTIST may NOT provide MODIFICATIONS for COMMERCIAL
PURPOSES. It is recognized by the RECIPIENT that such COMMERCIAL
PURPOSES may require a commercial license from the PROVIDER and the
PROVIDER has no obligation to grant a commercial license to its
ownership interest in the MATERIAL incorporated in the MODIFICATIONS.
Nothing in this paragraph, however, shall prevent the RECIPIENT from
granting commercial licenses under the RECIPIENT's intellectual property
rights claiming such MODIFICATIONS, or methods of their manufacture or
their use.

Example text
''''''''''''

The MTA should include directions for handling commercializable
products, including sharing of any royalties. The parties may wish to
include a clause, which allows them to negotiate a separate MTA should
the need for commercialization arise.

Request in Writing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Unless otherwise specified in this Agreement, in order for a Beneficiary
to exercise its Access Rights, these must first be requested in writing.
Access Rights to Background for implementation, Access Rights to Results
for implementation, and Access Right for Research Use are hereby
requested in writing by the Beneficiaries by way of signature of the
Consortium Agreement, and are hereby granted by the respective
Beneficiary, by means of signature of the Consortium Agreement.

Scope of Access Rights
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

All Access Rights pursuant to the Consortium Agreement shall be granted
on a nonexclusive basis and are worldwide, perpetual and irrevocable.
Such Access Rights shall not include the right to sub-license such
Access Rights. However, a Beneficiary who enjoys Access Rights may
authorize another legal entity, for instance an Affiliated Entity, to
exercise those rights on the Beneficiary’s behalf, provided that the
following conditions are fulfilled: (a) the Beneficiary that enjoys
Access Rights is liable for the acts of the other legal entity as if
those acts had been performed by the Beneficiary; and (b) Access Rights
granted to the other legal entity do not include the right to
sub-license.

The Research Use Access Right (As an option): The Research Use Access
Right includes that any Beneficiary, or its Affiliated Entities,
licensees and designees, may refer to any Results or Background
necessary to use such Results of another Beneficiary, in regulatory
documentation relating to any product owned by such Beneficiary, or its
Affiliated Entities, licensees and designees. Such regulatory
documentation may include the marketing authorization application,
patient information leaflet, summary of product characteristics and
equivalent documentation anywhere in the world. Prior to the submission
of such Results or Background in such regulatory documentation, the
submitting Beneficiary shall provide notice of its intent to make such
submission to enable the owning Beneficiary to file for Intellectual
Property protection covering such Results or Background (related to such
Results). In such case the submission may be delayed for [a reasonable
period of time] necessary to obtain such a protection.

Access by Third Parties 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

After completion of the Action, Third Parties have the right to request
Access Rights to the Results for Research Use. Such conditions may not
be more favourable than the conditions applied between Beneficiaries
(and their Affiliated Entities) for Research Use, pursuant to
[Agreement].

Example text
''''''''''''

Nothing included in this Agreement, including any intellectual property
protection being undertaken by the Recipient Institution on any new use
made with the Material, shall prevent the Donor Institution from being
able to distribute the Material to other commercial or non-commercial
entities.

Example text
''''''''''''

Nothing included in this Agreement shall prevent the Provider
Institution from being able to distribute the Material to other entities
as described in [Appendix]. If, as per the details included in
[Appendix], the Material is to be transferred to another institution for
the purposes of the Study, the responsibility for compliance with the
terms of this Agreement rests with the Recipient Institution.

Example text
''''''''''''

The RECIPIENT and the RECIPIENT SCIENTIST agree to refer to the PROVIDER
any request for the MATERIAL from anyone other than those persons
working under the RECIPIENT SCIENTIST's direct supervision. To the
extent supplies are available, the PROVIDER or the PROVIDER SCIENTIST
agrees to make the MATERIAL available, under a separate implementing
letter to this Agreement or other agreement having terms consistent with
the terms of this Agreement, to other scientists (at least those at
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION(S)) who wish to replicate the RECIPIENT
SCIENTIST's research; provided that such other scientists reimburse the
PROVIDER for any costs relating to the preparation and distribution of
the MATERIAL.

Example text
''''''''''''

Recipient agrees not to take or send the Biological Material to any
other location or to a third party without advance written approval of
Provider.

Example text
''''''''''''

Authorized users of the materials should be mentioned. The users cited
must agree to abide by the terms and conditions of the MTA. Transfer to
third parties not mentioned in the MTA is prohibited without written
consent of the provider organization or their assignees.

Storage
^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient Institution undertakes to store the Material in accordance
with all Applicable Laws and not to attempt to identify or contact the
donor of the Material or to compromise or otherwise infringe the
confidentiality of information on the donors and their right to privacy.

Example text
''''''''''''

A separate informed consent form shall be used for samples, which are
collected with the intention of being stored and used in future studies.
The consent form, which is separate from the one used for enrolment of
research participants into the study, shall include the following
components: purpose of sample storage, quantities of samples to be
stored, place where samples will be stored, measures to protect
confidentiality, policies that will govern use of the samples in future
research, potential risks and benefits of storing samples for future
research and any other information deemed necessary by the researcher or
Research Ethics Committee. After explaining the need to store the
samples, the research participant shall be given the option to choose
whether his/her sample should or should not be stored for future
studies. A [national] scientist shall be included as co-investigator in
all future studies using the human materials collected from [country]. A
research participant shall not be penalized for his/her refusal to store
the samples. Research participants reserve the right to withdraw their
samples from storage if the samples are linked. Any future research
study on such samples is subject to review by a Research Ethics
Committee. Where identifiable samples have been collected, for example,
as part of routine surveillance, emergency procedures, laboratory
quality control, notifiable diseases, routine counselling and testing,
etc., without the prior intention of conducting research on the samples,
samples sources shall be traced to provide consent for use of the
samples in research.

8. Publication
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Example text
''''''''''''

Each party may use the Results to update relevant recommendations and
develop any guidelines, including publication thereof, and may further
publish the Results, provided that a Party wishing to submit a
manuscript for publication is to transmit to the other Parties for their
review any material intended to be published at least fifteen (15)
working days (seven (7) days for abstracts) before a proposed
publication is submitted to any editor, publisher, referee or meeting
organizer. In the absence of an objection by the other Parties within
that 15 day period (or 7 days as the case may be) concerning prejudice
to their proprietary rights, the publication may proceed.

Example text
''''''''''''

Any employee or student of any Academic Party (whether or not involved
in the Project) may, provided that Academic Party has not received a
Confidentiality Notice, Publish any Background (unless it is the
Confidential Information of another party) or any of the Results.

Each of the Academic Parties will submit to any other party that owns
the Intellectual Property in any of the Results or that has contributed
any Background to the Project, in writing, details of those Results, and
of that Background that any employee or student of that Academic Party
intends to Publish, at least [30][60] days before the date of the
proposed submission for Publication. Any other party may, by giving
written notice to the party that has submitted those details ("a
Confidentiality Notice"): require that party to delay the proposed
Publication for a maximum of [number of] month[s] after receipt of the
Confidentiality Notice if, in its reasonable opinion, that delay is
necessary in order to seek patent or similar protection for any of its
Background or any the Results that are to be Published; or prevent the
Publication of any of its Background that is Confidential Information.
The Confidentiality Notice must be given within [number of] days after
receipt of details of the proposed Publication. If a Confidentiality
Notice is not received within that period, the proposed Publication may
proceed, provided that, whether or not a Confidentiality Notice has been
given, any other party’s Background that is Confidential Information may
not be published.

Example text
''''''''''''

Unless it goes against their legitimate interests, each beneficiary must
— as soon as possible — “disseminate” its results by disclosing them to
the public by appropriate means (other than those resulting from
protecting or exploiting the results), including in scientific
publications (in any medium).

Each beneficiary must ensure open access (free of charge, online access
for any user) to all peer-reviewed scientific publications relating to
its results.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient Scientist will acknowledge the source of the Material in
any publication reporting on its use. If the Recipient Scientist wishes
to include in a publication any information which has been provided by
the Donor Institution with the Material and which was clearly marked as
“confidential” at the point of disclosure (“Confidential Information”),
the Recipient Scientist will request permission from the Donor
Institution, providing a copy of the text before publication takes
place.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient Scientist will acknowledge the source of the Material in
any publication reporting on its use. If the Recipient Scientist wishes
to include in a publication any information which has been provided by
the Provider Institution with the Material and which was clearly marked
as “confidential” and “proprietary” at the point of disclosure
(“Confidential Information”), the Recipient Scientist must obtain
written permission from the Provider Institution, providing a copy of
the text to allow a reasonable period for review before publication
takes place, such permission not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed.
If so requested by the Provider Institution, the Recipient Institution
shall provide the Provider Institution with a confidential copy of the
findings of the Study.

Example text
''''''''''''

This agreement shall not be interpreted to prevent or delay publication
of research findings resulting from the use of the MATERIAL or the
MODIFICATIONS. The RECIPIENT SCIENTIST agrees to provide appropriate
acknowledgement of the source of the MATERIAL in all publications.

Example text
''''''''''''

In all oral presentations or written publications concerning the
Research Project, Recipient will acknowledge Provider’s contribution of
this Research Material unless requested otherwise.

Example text
''''''''''''

| Recipient shall share the results of the Research obtained through use
  of the Biological Material with Provider. In particular, Recipient
  undertakes to send a copy of any such publication based on use of the
  Biological Material (or derivative), promptly after it is published,
  to Provider, and to [network] at the following e-mail address [email].
| In accordance with scientific customs, the contributions of those who
  have made Biological Material available or of the [network] Scientists
  if appropriate, will be reflected expressly in all written or oral
  public disclosures concerning the Research using the Biological
  Material, by acknowledgment or co-authorship, as appropriate. The
  origin of the Biological Material must be included in such
  disclosures, as follows: “We thank [bank X] for providing the samples.
  [bank X] is a partner of the [Network] established in [year] thanks to
  [funding],[website address]"

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient shall appropriately acknowledge in presentations and
publications, the contributions of collaborators, including
laboratories/countries providing clinical specimens or influenza virus
with pandemic potential or reagents, using existing scientific
guidelines.

Example text
''''''''''''

If applicable, the Recipient shall appropriately acknowledge in
presentations and publications, the contributions of [network]
laboratories providing the materials identified in [Article], using
existing scientific guidelines.

Example text
''''''''''''

The provider organization may require the recipient organization to
publish or not to publish the data obtained from the material under
specified conditions.

If the provider organization allows any publication, it may be agreed
that the provider organization is acknowledged as the provider of the
material.

Review provisions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Any publication as referred to above will duly acknowledge the other
Parties in accordance with generally accepted authorship practices. In
addition to review of the content of publications as referred to above,
each Party will have the right to review the acknowledgement and request
reasonable changes to the use of its name, or request that its name be
deleted altogether.

9. Benefit sharing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Example text
''''''''''''

Such access rights for research use must be granted on a non-exclusive
basis under fair and reasonable conditions (i.e. appropriate conditions,
including financial terms or royalty-free, taking into account the
actual or potential value of the background to which access is requested
and other characteristics of the research use envisaged).

Example text
''''''''''''

The Parties shall make appropriate arrangements to promote that any
product which may result from collaborative research and development
work undertaken as a result of this Memorandum of Understanding, shall
be made widely available to the public on reasonable terms, including in
particular to the public sector of developing countries on preferential
terms. Any possible additional benefits, including royalties, shall be
granted to each Party with due account being taken of the relative value
of each Party’s financial, intellectual and other contributions to the
product (provided that priority shall always be given to the objective
of the Parties set forth in the first sentence of this paragraph).

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient shall actively seek the participation of scientists to the
fullest extent possible from originating laboratories and other
authorized laboratories, especially those from developing countries, in
scientific projects associated with research on clinical specimens
and/or influenza virus from their countries and actively engage them in
preparation of manuscripts for presentation and publication.

Example text
''''''''''''

The recipient agrees to comply with the commitments selected below, in
accordance with the terms set out in the Annex to this agreement.

The recipient shall comply with the commitments selected on a timetable
determined by the [network] in consultation with the Advisory Group
established by the [founding document] and in coordination with the
recipient, based on optimal pandemic preparedness and response
considerations.

| A. For manufacturers of vaccines and/or antivirals, the recipient
  shall commit to
| at least two of the following options:

    A1. Donate at least 10% of real time pandemic vaccine production to
    WHO.

    A2. Reserve at least 10% of real time pandemic vaccine production at
    affordable prices to WHO.

    A3. Donate at least X treatment courses of needed antiviral medicine
    for the pandemic to WHO.

    A4. Reserve at least X treatment courses of needed antiviral
    medicine for the pandemic at affordable prices.

    A5. Grant to manufacturers in developing countries licenses on
    mutually agreed terms that should be fair and reasonable including
    in respect of affordable royalties, taking into account development
    levels in the country of end use of the products, on technology,
    know-how, products and processes for which it holds IPR for the
    production of (i) influenza vaccines, (ii) adjuvants, (iii)
    antivirals and/or (iv) diagnostics.

    A6. Grant royalty-free licenses to manufacturers in developing
    countries or grant to WHO royalty-free, non-exclusive licenses on
    IPR, which can be sublicensed, for the production of pandemic
    influenza vaccines, adjuvants, antivirals products and diagnostics
    needed in a pandemic.

WHO may sublicense these licenses to manufacturers in developing
countries on appropriate terms and conditions and in accordance with
sound public health principles.

Where Option 5 or 6 is selected, the Recipient shall regularly provide
to WHO information on granted licenses and the status of implementation
of the licensing agreement. WHO shall provide such information to the
Advisory Group.

| B. Manufacturers of products relevant to pandemic influenza
  preparedness and
| response, that are not manufacturing vaccines or antivirals, shall
  commit to one of the following options: A5, A6, B1, B2, B3, B4.

    B1. Donate to WHO at least X2 diagnostic kits needed for pandemics.

    B2. Reserve for WHO at least X2 diagnostic kits needed for
    pandemics, at affordable prices.

    B3. Support, in coordination with WHO, the strengthening of
    influenza specific laboratory and surveillance capacity in
    developing countries.

    B4. Support, in coordination with WHO, transfer of technology,
    know-how and/or processes for pandemic influenza preparedness and
    response in developing countries.

C. The recipient shall, in addition to the commitments selected under A
or B above, consider contributing to the measures listed below, as
appropriate:

-  Donations of vaccines;

-  Donations of pre-pandemic vaccines;

-  Donations of antivirals;

-  Donations of medical devices;

-  Donations of diagnostic kits;

-  Affordable pricing;

-  Transfer of technology and processes;

-  Granting of sublicenses to WHO;

-  Laboratory and surveillance capacity building

Example text
''''''''''''

The MTA should state clearly what technologies would be transferred to
the provider organization or country. Other collateral benefits to the
provider organization such as building infrastructure, training and
provision of certain services may be included.

10. Intellectual Property
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Access to Information or Background Information
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Each party grants each of the other parties a royalty-free,
non-exclusive license to use its Background for the purpose of carrying
out the Project, but for no other purpose. None of the parties may grant
any sub-license to use any other party's Background except: (1) that any
party may allow its Group Companies, and any person working for it or
any Group Company, or on its behalf or that of any Group Company, to use
any party’s Background for the purpose of carrying out the Project, but
for no other purpose; or (2) if the owner of the Background grants
further license.

Except as otherwise expressly permitted under this agreement, none of
the parties will have the right to use another party's Background or
Results (whether to exploit its own or any other Results or for any
other purpose) unless it negotiates and obtains a further license that
allows it to do so. The owner of the Intellectual Property in any
Background or Result may refuse to grant that further license, and if it
agrees to grant that further license, the terms of that further license
may include a royalty or other payment in return for that further
license.

Example text
''''''''''''

Beneficiaries are not required to grant access rights for direct
exploitation to their own background and may use, exploit, sublicense or
otherwise commercialize their background as they see fit, subject to
access rights for research use.

Example text
''''''''''''

This Agreement does not affect the ownership of any Intellectual
Property in any Background or in any other technology, design, work,
invention, software, data, technique, know-how, or materials that are
not Results. The Intellectual Property in them will remain the property
of the party that contributes them to the Project (or its licensors). No
license to use any Intellectual Property is granted or implied by this
Agreement except the rights explicitly granted in this Agreement.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Provider under [agreement] may have used technology protected by
IPRs for the generation and/or modification of the Materials. Any
recipient of such Materials acknowledges that such IPRs shall be
respected.

Access to results
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Except as otherwise expressly permitted under this agreement, none of
the parties will have the right to use another party's Background or
Results (whether to exploit its own or any other Results or for any
other purpose) unless it negotiates and obtains a further license that
allows it to do so. The owner of the Intellectual Property in any
Background or Result may refuse to grant that further license, and if it
agrees to grant that further license, the terms of that further license
may include a royalty or other payment in return for that further
license.

Example text
''''''''''''

Where direct exploitation by a beneficiary or third party requires
results owned by another beneficiary, the access rights may be
negotiated between the parties involved.

After the completion of the action, third parties shall have the right
to request and receive access rights to the results of the beneficiaries
for research use.

Such access rights must be granted on a non-exclusive basis under
conditions considered appropriate by the owner of the results and the
third party concerned. Those conditions may not be more favorable than
the conditions applied to beneficiaries and affiliated entities for
research use.

The beneficiaries must give access to their results — on a royalty-free
basis — to the [donors]. Such access rights are limited to
non-commercial and non-competitive use. This does not change the right
to use any material, document or information received from the
beneficiaries for communication and publicizing activities.

Each beneficiary may transfer ownership of its results. It must however
ensure that its obligations under this agreement also apply to the new
owner and this new owner has the obligation to pass them on in any
subsequent transfer.

A beneficiary that intends to transfer ownership of results must give at
least 45 days advance notice to other beneficiaries that still have (or
still may request) access rights to the result. This notification must
include sufficient information on the new owner to enable any
beneficiary concerned to assess the effects on its access rights.

Unless agreed otherwise (in writing) for specifically identified third
parties, any other beneficiary may object within 30 days of receiving
notification (or less if agreed in writing), if it can show that the
transfer would adversely affect its access rights. In this case, the
transfer may not take place until agreement has been reached between the
beneficiaries concerned.

Notwithstanding the above, a beneficiary may, without the consent of the
other beneficiaries but provided that the other beneficiaries are
informed without undue delay and that the transferee agrees in writing
to be bound by this agreement and the consortium agreement, transfer its
results to any of the following: (i) its affiliated entity; (ii) any
purchaser of all or a substantial amount of its relevant assets; (iii)
any successor entity resulting from the merger with or consolidation of
such a beneficiary.

Open Access
^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

No Party to this MTA shall seek to obtain any intellectual property
rights to the Results and each Party agrees to release such results in
the public domain through publications and by making such results
otherwise available to interested Parties. The Parties shall require
that any subsequent recipients of the Results shall similarly not seek
to obtain any intellectual property rights to the Results and similarly
release such results in the public domain.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient agrees that it shall not seek Intellectual Property rights
of any kind, or any other protection in respect of the Materials and
Data Set(s), other Confidential Information or any Results, without the
Supplier’s prior written consent.

Example text
''''''''''''

Neither the Provider nor the Recipient should seek to obtain any
intellectual property rights (IPRs) on the Materials.

The Provider and the Recipient acknowledge that any IPRs on the
Materials obtained before the date of adoption of the [founding
document] will not be affected by [agreement].

Co-ownership of IP
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Authority to File Patents - The Lead Institution has the responsibility
and authority to take all reasonable actions necessary and appropriate
to seek patent protection for the Patent Rights in accordance with the
terms of this Agreement. The Lead Institution may not delegate this
authority to a Licensee, unless stated otherwise in Exhibit A or unless
such delegation is approved by the Other Institution(s) for a particular
Licensee. Although the Lead Institution will have the ultimate decision
authority in these matters, the Lead Institution will use reasonable
efforts to keep the Other Institution(s) reasonably informed as to all
material patent prosecution actions and decisions, and the Lead
Institution will give due consideration to any recommendations made by
the Other Institution(s) concerning the patent prosecution. Lead
Institution will provide, or direct outside patent counsel to provide,
Other Institution(s) with all serial numbers and filing dates, together
with copies of all applications in the Patent Rights and patents that
issue from the Patent Rights, including copies of all office actions,
responses and all other communications from the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office and the patent offices in any other jurisdictions.

Foreign Patent Prosecution - In instances where there is no commitment
from a Licensee to reimburse Patent Expenses, Lead Institution will
consult with the Other Institution(s) regarding foreign filings
reasonably in advance of the filing deadline. If an Other Institution(s)
is not willing to pay its Share of Patent Expenses for any such foreign
filing, it will so notify the Lead Institution in writing in accordance
with [Section] and the consequences stated under [Section] will apply if
the Lead Institution elects to proceed with foreign filings.

Consequences of Other Institution Withdrawing from Paying or Defaulting
on Payment of Patent Expenses - If another Institution becomes a
Withdrawing Party, then the other Party(ies) may elect to either
terminate this Agreement by providing 30 days’ prior written notice, or
to pay the Withdrawing Party’s Share of Patent Expenses (the “Covered
Expenses”). If the other Party(ies) elect to pay the Covered Expenses,
the “Consequences of Withdrawal” indicated in the Transaction Terms will
apply, subject to the following:

    (a) If the Transaction Terms indicate a reduction in the Withdrawing
    Party’s Share of Net Consideration, that reduction will only be
    applicable to Net Consideration reasonably attributable to the
    Patent Rights for which the other Party(ies) are paying Covered
    Expenses;

    (b) If the Transaction Terms indicate a recovery of a multiple of
    the Covered Expenses, the Party(ies) paying the Covered Expenses
    will be entitled to recover that amount from the first of any
    License Consideration reasonably attributable to Patent Rights for
    which the other Party(ies) are paying Covered Expenses;

    (c) If the Transaction Terms indicate “Share only with Withdrawing
    Party’s Inventors,” then the Withdrawing Party’s Share of Net
    Consideration for any Net Consideration reasonably attributable to
    the Patent Rights for which the other Party(ies) are paying Covered
    Expenses will be reduced to zero, but the paying Party will pay the
    Withdrawing Party’s inventors a share of such Net Consideration in
    accordance with the paying Party’s policy;

    (d) If the Transaction Terms indicate “Meet and Confer,” then the
    Parties will confer and negotiate in good faith a fair accommodation
    to the other Party(ies) for the additional cost and risk, if any,
    assumed by paying the Covered Expenses; and

    (e) Nothing in this [Section] will eliminate the right of a
    Withdrawing Party under [Section] to reimbursement of Patent
    Expenses actually paid by the Withdrawing Party.

Abandonment of Patent Rights by Lead Institution - The Lead Institution
will not abandon the prosecution of any patent application (except in
favor of a continuation, divisional or continuation-in-part application)
or the maintenance of any Patent Rights without notifying the Other
Institution(s) in writing at least 90 days in advance of any applicable
deadline and allowing the Other Institution(s) the opportunity to
prosecute or maintain such Patent Rights at its sole expense in the name
of Other Institution(s) and Lead Institution. If the Other
Institution(s) wishes to continue prosecution of such Patent Rights,
then the Parties will negotiate in good faith an appropriate arrangement
to enable the Other Institution(s) to continue prosecution and
commercialization of such Patent Rights, which may include the Parties
entering into a new agreement that gives an Other Institution the lead
in patent prosecution and licensing with appropriate adjustments in the
economic arrangements between the Parties.

Patent Assignments - Lead Institution will record assignments of Patent
Rights in the names of the Lead Institution and the Other Institution(s)
in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office and other government patent
offices, as applicable, and will provide Other Institution(s) with a
copy of each recorded assignment.

Patent Expenses:

    (a) The Patent Expenses invoiced to the Parties prior to the
    Effective Date are identified as Past Patent Expenses in the
    Transaction Terms. Within 90 days of the Effective Date, the other
    Party(ies) will pay its Share of Patent Expenses with respect to the
    Past Patent Expenses to the Parties that incurred such expenses.

    (b) The Lead Institution will be solely responsible for reviewing
    and approving all Patent Expenses incurred after the Effective Date
    and for ensuring that all Patent Expenses are paid in a timely
    manner. The Lead Institution will furnish to the Other
    Institution(s) copies of all invoices for Patent Expenses on a
    regular basis. The Other Institution(s), within 90 days after
    receipt of the invoices, will reimburse to the Lead Institution its
    Share of Patent Expenses, which have been paid by the Lead
    Institution and not reimbursed by a Licensee. Notwithstanding the
    foregoing, Lead Institution will notify Other Institution(s) prior
    to incurring any Extraordinary Patent Expenses. In the event such
    advance notice is given, the Other Institution(s) may elect to pay
    its Share of Patent Expenses for such Extraordinary Patent Expenses
    or decline to pay such share and have the consequences stated in
    [Section] apply. In the event Extraordinary Patent Expenses are
    incurred and advance notice was not given, Other Institution(s) will
    not be responsible for reimbursing any portion of such Extraordinary
    Patent Expenses.

    (c) Upon at least 90 days’ prior written notice from an Other
    Institution to the other Party(ies), such Other Institution may
    decline to pay its Share of Patent Expenses incurred after such
    notice period for either of the following as specified in such
    notice: (i) all Patent Expenses outside the United States, or (ii)
    all Patent Expenses. If the other Party(ies) pays such Patent
    Expenses, then the consequences stated in [Section] will apply.

Reserved Rights - Each Party expressly reserves the right to use the
Patent Rights and associated inventions or technology for educational
and research purposes, and to grant such educational and research rights
to other non-profit institutions. Each Party can also license rights to
the U.S. government as required by its obligations related to research
funding.

A third-party beneficiary
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Ownership of any intellectual property rights arising from collaborative
activities under this Memorandum of Understanding shall be agreed by the
Parties on a case-by-case basis. However, regardless of whether the
Parties shall agree that ownership of the intellectual property rights
of a particular collaborative activity shall be vested in WHO and
[insert name of contractual partner] jointly, or WHO or [insert name of
contractual partner] alone, or in any third party, the Parties agree
that the industrial or commercial exploitation of such rights shall be
designed to achieve the objectives set forth in paragraph 6.1 above, and
shall be subject to and exercised in accordance with an agreement to be
negotiated in good faith between WHO and [insert name of contractual
partner ], or WHO, [insert name of contractual partner] and the third
party concerned, as the case may be.

Recipient takes the IP
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Where the Purpose or Use involving the Material results in an Invention,
discovery, know-how or any finding that has the likelihood of adding to
the general knowledge about the disease, including without limitation
the procedures for collection and storage of samples, diagnosis,
treatment, survival chance, quality of life, safety guidelines and other
topics shall be shared promptly and systematically with the Provider and
the third parties beneficiaries to this MTA without awaiting
Publication.

Example text
''''''''''''

The party that creates or generates any Result will own the Intellectual
Property in that Result, and may take such steps as it may decide from
time to time, at its expense and sole discretion, to register and
maintain any protection for that Intellectual Property, including filing
and prosecuting patent applications for any Result, and taking any
action in respect of any alleged or actual infringement of that
Intellectual Property. Where any third party such as a student or
contractor is involved in the Project, the party engaging that
contractor will ensure that the student and the contractor assign to it
any Intellectual Property they may have in the Results in order to be
able to give effect to the provisions of this clause.

Where any Result is created or generated by two or more parties jointly
and it is impossible to distinguish each party's intellectual
contribution to the creation of the Intellectual Property in that
Result, the Intellectual Property in that Result will be owned by those
parties in equal shares. The owners may take such steps as they may
decide from time to time, at their joint and equal expense, to register
and maintain any protection for that Intellectual Property, including
filing and prosecuting patent applications for any Result, and taking
any action in respect of any alleged or actual infringement of that
Intellectual Property. If one or more of the owners does not wish to
take any such step or action, the other owner(s) may do so at their
expense, and the party not wishing to take such steps or action will
provide, at the expense of the party making the request, any assistance
that is reasonably requested of it.

Any joint owner of any of the Intellectual Property in any Result may
deal with and exploit that Intellectual Property as though it were the
sole owner, without being required to account to any other joint owner
for any share in the revenues generated by that dealing or exploitation,
provided that no joint owner may grant any third party any rights that
detract from any other joint owner’s right to deal with any jointly
owned Intellectual Property.

License to Use Results for the Project - Each party grants each of the
other parties a royalty free, non-exclusive license to use the Results
for the purpose of carrying out the Project. Any party may allow its
Group Companies, and any person working for it or any Group Company, or
on its behalf or that of any Group Company, to use any of the Results
for the purpose of carrying out the Project.

Negotiation for License to Use Results beyond the Project - Each party
(the Potential Grantor) will, if another party (the Party Wishing to
Exploit) gives it written notice (an Option Notice) at any time during
the Project Period plus a further [XXX] months, negotiate the terms on
which the Potential Grantor will grant rights to the Party Wishing to
Exploit to exploit the Intellectual Property in some or all of its
Results and its Background.

Following the Potential Grantor’s receipt of an Option Notice, the
Potential Grantor and the Party Wishing to Exploit will negotiate in
good faith, for a period of up to [number of days or months] after the
date of receipt of the Option Notice (the Negotiation Period) the terms
of an assignment or license. If the parties are unable to agree the
terms of an assignment or license within the Negotiation Period, the
rights of the Party wishing to Exploit -beyond the purpose or duration
of the project will lapse.

The Potential Grantor will not, during the Negotiation Period, negotiate
with any other party with a view to granting a license to use its
Results or Background or assigning the Intellectual Property in its
Results or Background nor, during the [number of] months following the
end of the Negotiation Period, will the Potential Grantor grant a
license of any of its Result or assign any of the Intellectual Property
in its Results or Background to any party on any terms more favorable
than those offered to the Party Wishing to Exploit pursuant to this
clause.

Until the earlier of the end of the Negotiation Period and the date of
the assignment or grant of a license pursuant to this clause, the
Potential Grantor will consult with the Party Wishing to Exploit about
making patent applications in respect of the Results. If, during the
Negotiation Period, the Party Wishing to Exploit wishes the Potential
Grantor to apply for any patent in relation to any of the Results, the
Party Wishing to Exploit will reimburse to the Potential Grantor the
reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the Potential Grantor since
the date of this Agreement in relation to the filing and prosecution of
that patent application, including (without limitation) patent agents'
fees, as a result of any request to apply for, or to maintain, any
patent at the Party Wishing to Exploit’s request. If the Potential
Grantor later licenses or assigns to another party any of the Results or
the Background for which the Party Wishing to Exploit has paid any such
costs and expenses, the Potential Grantor will reimburse those costs and
expenses to the Party wishing to Exploit.

Example text
''''''''''''

The RECIPIENT is free to file patent application(s) claiming inventions
made by the RECIPIENT through the use of the MATERIAL but agrees to
notify the PROVIDER upon filing a patent application claiming
MODIFICATIONS or method(s) of manufacture or use(s) of the MATERIAL.

Example text
''''''''''''

| When Provider is the PHS (Public Health Services): Recipient shall
  retain title to any patent or other intellectual property rights in
  inventions made by its employees in the course of the Research
  Project. Recipient agrees not to claim, infer, or imply Governmental
  endorsement of the Research Project, the institution or personnel
  conducting the Research Project or any resulting product(s). Unless
  prohibited by law from doing so, recipient agrees to hold the United
| States Government harmless and to indemnify the Government for all
  liabilities, demands, damages, expenses and losses arising out of
  Recipient’s use for any purpose of the Research Material.

When Recipient is the PHS: The PHS shall retain title to any patent or
other intellectual property rights in inventions made by its employees
in the course of the Research Project. The PHS is not authorized to
promise rights in advance for inventions developed under this Agreement.
Provider acquires no intellectual property rights under this MTA, but
may apply for license rights to any patentable invention that might
result from this Research Project. It is the intention of PHS that
Provider not be liable to PHS for any claims or damages arising from
PHS’s use of the Research Material; however, no indemnification is
provided or intended.

Example text
''''''''''''

[Supplier] hereby grants to the Recipient a non-exclusive worldwide
royalty-free research licence under its intellectual property rights to
use the Materials for the purposes of the Investigation.

[Supplier] makes no warranty or representation that the Materials
(whether when used for the Investigation or otherwise) do not and will
not infringe the intellectual property of a third party. [Supplier]
hereby excludes to the fullest extent permitted by law any liability
arising (whether directly or indirectly) from any action, claim,
proceedings, demands, losses (including but not limited to loss of
profit), costs, awards damages and payments made by Recipient arising
from a claim by a third party that the use of the Materials for the
purposes of the Investigation or otherwise infringes the intellectual
property of the third party.

Nothing in this Agreement shall operate to transfer to the Recipient any
intellectual property rights of [Supplier] in the Materials.

All intellectual property rights (including, without limitation, design
rights, copyrights, database rights, rights in confidential information
and know-how and the right to apply for patents) and all results, data
and discoveries arising out of the Investigation shall belong to the
Recipient. Except as specifically provided in [Clauses] , [Supplier]
shall have no right or licence in respect of such intellectual property
rights, results, data and/or discoveries.

In this Agreement, “Invention” shall mean a patentable invention
developed by the Recipient in the course of the Investigation that
relates directly and principally to the Materials itself.

If the Recipient files any application for a patent in respect of an
Invention, it shall at [Supplier]'s request and expense, grant to
[Supplier] a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free licence to use for
research purposes only any resultant patents solely in connection with
the Materials (with the right to sub-license solely in connection with
the distribution of the Materials to third parties by [Supplier] under a
substantially similar agreement to this agreement).

Any publication of the results of the Investigation shall acknowledge
[Supplier] as having made available the Materials.

Protective patenting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Each beneficiary must examine the possibility of protecting its results
and must adequately protect them — for an appropriate period and with
appropriate territorial coverage — if: (a) the results can reasonably be
expected to be commercially or industrially exploited and (b) protecting
them is possible, reasonable and justified (given the circumstances).

If a beneficiary intends not to protect its results, to stop protecting
them or not seek an extension of protection, the Joint Undertaking may —
under certain conditions — assume ownership to ensure their (continued)
protection.

Each Beneficiary agrees to examine the possibility of protecting its
Results, and, where appropriate, adequately protect them by any means
for an appropriate period and within appropriate territorial coverage
if: a) the Results can reasonably be expected to be commercially or
industrially exploited, and b) protecting them is possible, reasonable
and justified (given the circumstances).

When deciding on the protection of Results, the Beneficiary must
consider the legitimate interest of its own and other Beneficiaries.
Means of protection may include, but are not limited to, patenting or
maintaining the Results as confidential know-how.

Each Beneficiary shall enter into appropriate agreement(s) with its
employees, agents or third parties to make sure the ownership to the
Results is properly transferred to the Beneficiary.

The funder must be noted in any application for protection on the
Results filed by the Beneficiary.

Unreasonable restriction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

3.7  Subject to the exception in Clause 3.8, UK Biobank confirms that it
will have no rights or licence to the Intellectual Property Rights in
relation to any inventions or findings developed by the Applicant as a
result of using the Materials (‘Applicant-Generated Inventions’).

3.8  The exception would apply where Applicant-Generated Inventions are,
or are in the process of being, used unreasonably to restrict
health-related research and/or access to healthcare anywhere in the
world (‘Unreasonable Restriction’). If, at its reasonable discretion, UK
Biobank considers that an Unreasonable Restriction exists or is likely
to exist then it shall promptly notify the Applicant and automatically,
on receipt of such notification, the Applicant shall be deemed to grant
a perpetual, irrevocable, worldwide, fully paid-up, royalty-free, fully
sub-licensable licence to UK Biobank to use such Applicant-Generated
Invention in order to remove or mitigate the Unreasonable Restriction.

12. Dissemination of data and results 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Example text
''''''''''''

Sharing Information

    (a) Each Party shall, on request, disclose to the other Parties, in
    the form of written documentation, on a confidential basis in
    accordance with the terms of [the agreement], all data and
    information already available to it, or developed by it during the
    course of this Collaboration Agreement, relating in any way to the
    Purpose.

    (b) Each party should take the responsibility to ensure that results
    – even when preliminary – are adequately robust and have undergone
    quality control, prior to public disclosure.

    (c)Each party has an obligation to publicly disclose quality
    controlled interim results according to a specific expedited
    timeline commitment for results sharing that should be made in
    protocols and analysis plans before trial commencement.

    (d) Prior to the start of any clinical trial (i.e. prior to the
    first subject receiving the first experimental intervention) a
    clinical trial registry entry is to be made on a [registry]. Where
    the registry has a results summary section, public disclosure of
    interim and final results should occur using the results summary
    component of the registry.

    (e) Final results are to be publicly disclosed, no later than 28
    days after the primary study completion date, using the results
    summary section of the registry entry.

Example text
''''''''''''

Data ownership and associated intellectual property rights shall be
discussed and agreed upon by collaborating partners at the inception of
a research project. Collaborating research partners shall negotiate data
ownership and use in accordance with the host organization’s data use
and ownership policies. Ownership of data shall be clearly stated in the
research protocol or collaborative research agreements, which shall be
reviewed by the Research Ethics Committee and registered with
[regulator].

Collaborating research partners shall agree on appropriate data access
and use rights before commencement of the study. Researchers shall have
in place mechanisms for maintaining confidentiality of research
participants and their communities.

A collaborating research partner shall not transfer data to a third
party without the written consent of the other partner.

Local researchers shall have unrestricted access rights to data sets
collected through a collaborative research project.

Researchers shall ensure that research records from which the data has
been obtained are available at the research site for at least five years
after completion of the research project. Electronic records are
acceptable.

Researchers shall, as appropriate, make all reasonable efforts to share
findings of research with the host organization, research participants,
key stakeholders and communities in which research was done.

Researchers shall describe in the protocol plans for research results
dissemination and ensure its execution.

Researchers shall be sensitive about the ethical implications of the
research results, and take appropriate measures to protect research
participants and their communities.

Open Access
^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

“Global Access” requires that products, services, processes,
technologies, materials, software, data or other innovations
(collectively, “Funded Developments”) arising from projects funded by
the Foundation be managed in a manner that ensures “Global Access.”
Global Access requires that (a) the knowledge and information gained
from the Project be promptly and broadly disseminated and (b) the Funded
Developments be made available and accessible at an affordable price (i)
to people most in need within developing countries or (ii) in support of
the U.S. educational system and public libraries, as applicable to the
funded project.

Example text
''''''''''''

By law and policy, [network] non-exclusive licenses. Licenses to
platform technologies, including in the field of diagnostics, will be
available on a nonexclusive basis or in some cases under an exclusive
license with very narrow product specific limitations. Consistent with
applicable laws, regulations and policies, exclusive licenses will be
considered for potential drug (small molecular entities and biologics)
and vaccine components and will be limited to defined indications and
territories. Nonexclusive licenses will be available for technologies to
the extent defined indications and territories are not already licensed
exclusively or subject to an exclusive license option under a
[agreement].

Example text
''''''''''''

Regarding the digital research data generated in the action (“data”),
the beneficiaries must: (a) deposit in a research data repository and
take measures to make it possible for third parties to access, mine,
exploit, reproduce and disseminate — free of charge for any user — the
following: (i) the data, including associated metadata, needed to
validate the results presented in scientific publications as soon as
possible; (ii) other data, including associated metadata, as specified
and within the deadlines laid down in the “data management plan” in
Annex 1. (b) provide information — via the repository — about tools and
instruments at the disposal of the beneficiaries and necessary for
validating the results (and — where possible — provide the tools and
instruments themselves).

As an exception, the beneficiaries do not have to ensure open access to
specific parts of their research data if the achievement of the action's
main objective would be jeopardized by making those specific parts of
the research data openly accessible. In this case, the data management
plan must contain the reasons for not giving access.

Open Access to Research Data
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Example text
''''''''''''

Regarding the digital research data generated in the action (“data”),
the beneficiaries must: (a) deposit in a research data repository and
take measures to make it possible for third parties to access, mine,
exploit, reproduce and disseminate — free of charge for any user — the
following: (i) the data, including associated metadata, needed to
validate the results presented in scientific publications as soon as
possible; (ii) other data, including associated metadata, as specified
and within the deadlines laid down in the “data management plan” in
[Annex]. (b) provide information — via the repository — about tools and
instruments at the disposal of the beneficiaries and necessary for
validating the results (and — where possible — provide the tools and
instruments themselves).

As an exception, the beneficiaries do not have to ensure open access to
specific parts of their research data if the achievement of the action's
main objective, as described in [Annex], would be jeopardized by making
those specific parts of the research data openly accessible. In this
case, the data management plan must contain the reasons for not giving
access.

Sharing amongst parties to the MTA
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

The Results shall be shared by Recipient with the supplier and each
Party, the MOH, and WHO shall be free to use such Results for further
research and development purposes, and to update their respective
counselling messages and recommendations and to develop relevant
guidelines, including the right of publication thereof.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Results shall be shared by Recipient as soon as they are obtained,
regardless of their status (preliminary, definitive or otherwise) in a
timely, systematic manner with the supplier and each Party, the MOH,
WHO, and the emergency responder medical care / treatment unit which is
treating the patient (donor) from whom the specimen was taken for
testing and each of Recipient, the MOH, and WHO shall be free to use
such Results for treatment, further research and development purposes,
and to update their respective counselling messages and recommendations
and to develop relevant guidelines, including the right of publication
thereof. The Recipient hereby grants MOH, WHO and third party
beneficiary TBD a non-exclusive royalty-free, perpetual, irrevocable,
worldwide license to use such Results/Data for any legally permitted
purpose as determined by them and disclose such information to
regulatory authorities and to other third parties For purposes of this
Agreement, “Data” is defined as any and all results, conclusions,
observations, formulations, methodologies, algorithms, reports of
testing, case reports forms and any other data arising from the studies,
tests, essays or evaluations using the Material under this Agreement.

Licensing of results, including special licenses for the public good
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Provided that any access rights to the results can be exercised and that
any additional obligations under this Agreement or consortium agreement
are complied with by the beneficiary who owns results, the latter may
grant licenses to its results (or otherwise give the right to exploit
them) to any legal entity.

Example text
''''''''''''

Any and all data and information that are made or developed by the
Parties under this Agreement or otherwise in connection with the
Collaboration’s activities, shall be owned by the Party or Parties
generating such data or information, provided that WHO is hereby vested
with a worldwide, royalty-free, sub-licensable, irrevocable and
perpetual, non-exclusive license in all such data and information made
or developed covering all applications and uses for which the rights may
be exercised, including but not limited to publication of the data
and/or information.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Manufacturer is willing to release the above mentioned information
(hereinafter referred to as “the Information”) to WHO, for the purpose
of enabling WHO to assess such Information and facilitate expert
consensus on ethical protocols for the clinical testing and use of the
Product for the treatment or prevention [disease name] (hereinafter
referred to as "the Purpose"), provided that WHO undertakes to release
the Information only to persons who have a need to know for the Purpose
and are bound by like obligations of confidentiality and non-use, as are
contained in this Agreement.

WHO undertakes to regard the Information as the Manufacturer’s
proprietary information and agrees to take all reasonable measures to
ensure that the Information is not used or disclosed, in whole or in
part, other than as provided in [paragraph], for a period of [number of]
years from the date of disclosure to WHO (with exceptions).

The parties agree that if and to the extent that the public disclosure
of any of the Information is required to enable clinical use of the
Product, WHO shall seek the Manufacturer’s prior written consent for
such disclosure, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.

Example text
''''''''''''

Each Academic Party and each of its employees and students will have the
irrevocable, royalty-free right to use the Results for the purposes of
academic teaching and academic research [and clinical patient care][,
including research projects sponsored by any third party]. The rights in
this clause are subject to the rules on Academic Publication.

Example text
''''''''''''

Except for the rights expressly granted herein, the RECIPIENT agrees
that no other rights or licenses, whether express or implied, are
granted to the RECIPIENT under any patent, patent application, or other
proprietary right of the PROVIDER. As between the parties, each retains
all right, title, and interest in works and inventions made by its
personnel, and nothing herein shall be construed to transfer ownership
of any invention, patent, patent application, or other proprietary
right.

Example text
''''''''''''

If the RECIPIENT desires to use or license the MATERIAL or MODIFICATIONS
for COMMERCIAL PURPOSES, the RECIPIENT agrees, in advance of such use,
to negotiate in good faith with the PROVIDER to establish the terms of a
commercial license. It is understood by the RECIPIENT that the PROVIDER
shall have no obligation to grant such a license to the RECIPIENT, and
may grant exclusive or non-exclusive commercial licenses to others, or
sell or assign all or part of the rights in the MATERIAL to any third
party(ies), subject to any pre-existing rights held by others and
obligations to the Federal Government.

Use of Names
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Without limiting the Parties' rights to describe this collaboration as
necessary, neither Party will issue a press release referring to the
parties’ collaboration under this MTA, and/or otherwise use the name
and/or emblem of the other Party in any public statement, without the
prior written consent of that other Party .

Example text
''''''''''''

None of the parties will use another party's name or the name of any of
the Key Personnel provided by another party, or another party’s logo, in
any press release or product advertising, or for any other promotional
purpose, without first obtaining that other party's written consent.

Example text
''''''''''''

Except as provided for under [sections of agreement], no party shall use
any other party’s name, logo or trademarks for any purpose including
without limitation publicity or advertising, except with the prior
written consent of the other party.

Example text
''''''''''''

Neither Recipient nor Provider shall use the name of the other party or
any contraction or derivative thereof or the name(s) of the other
party's faculty members, employees, contractors or students, as
applicable, in any advertising, promotional, sales literature, or
fund-raising documents without prior written consent from the other
party.

Example text
''''''''''''

Subject to [clause], the Recipient shall not use [Supplier’s] name in
any publication, public announcement or other public disclosure without
the consent of [Supplier].

Press Release
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Without limiting the Parties' rights to describe this collaboration as
necessary, neither Party will issue a press release referring to the
parties’ collaboration under this MTA, and/or otherwise use the name
and/or emblem of the other Party in any public statement, without the
prior written consent of that other Party .

Example text
''''''''''''

Each party may disclose to third parties or make public statements, by
press release or otherwise, regarding the existence of this Agreement,
the identity of the parties, the terms, conditions and subject matter of
this Agreement, or otherwise in reference to this Agreement, provided
such disclosures or statements are accurate and complete with respect to
the subject

13. Relevant laws, regulations & good practice
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Example text
''''''''''''

Recipient will use the Materials and Information for the Purpose only
and in compliance with all applicable international, federal,
provincial/state and local laws, rules, guidelines and regulations.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient acknowledges and agrees that the use or transfer of
Material and Data Set(s) or the other Confidential Information may
require the prior authorization of competent authorities in the Host
Country, including with respect to Project that are not regulated as
medical research in the country of the Recipient or that do not require
prior authorization under the legislation of the country of the
Recipient. Supplier shall use reasonable efforts to obtain any required
authorizations as needed for the Project prior to sending Material and
Data Set(s) or other Confidential Information to Recipient or
Recipient’s designated subcontractor for the Project.

Example text
''''''''''''

Each of the parties agree to comply with all applicable [location]
anti-corruption, anti-bribery and local employment laws, as well as any
other applicable legislation, laws and regulations in connection with
their performance under this Agreement, (including that relating to
import and export control, transportation of hazardous materials,
anti-money laundering, and tax laws). Either party’s failure to comply
with any provision of this Clause is considered to be a breach of this
Agreement.

Example text
''''''''''''

The RECIPIENT agrees to use the MATERIAL in compliance with all
applicable statutes and regulations, [regulations and guidelines] such
as, for example, those relating to research involving the use of animals
or recombinant DNA.

Example text
''''''''''''

Recipient shall use the Biological Material in compliance with all
applicable laws and government regulations. Under no conditions will the
Material be used in human subjects.

The Biological Material has been collected and processed by Provider in
compliance with all applicable laws, rules, regulations and other
requirements of any applicable governmental authority, including without
limitation those applicable to patient informed consent.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Provider undertakes the following with respect to the Materials:

-  To comply with its respective [network] terms of reference.

-  To ensure that the Materials are handled in accordance with
   applicable WHO guidelines and national bio-safety standards.

-  The Recipient undertakes the following with respect to the Materials:

-  To comply with its respective [network] terms of reference.

-  To ensure that the Materials are handled in accordance with
   applicable WHO guidelines and national bio-safety standards.

Biosafety and biosecurity
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient further agrees that the Material: must not be treated as
if the Material is free of contamination, as biological materials have
the potential for carrying viruses, latent viral genomes and other
infectious agents in an unapparent state; and must always be handled
carefully by trained persons who follow all safety guidelines and
protocols when working with the Material and under laboratory conditions
which afford adequate biohazard containment.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient further agrees that the Material: must not be treated as
if the Material is free of contamination, as biological materials have
the potential for carrying viruses, latent viral genomes and other
infectious agents in an unapparent state; cannot be used in humans; is
hazardous and designated as biosafety level \_\_\_ and must always be
handled carefully by trained persons who follow all safety guidelines
and protocols when working with the Material and under laboratory
conditions which afford adequate biohazard containment. The Recipient
shall retain the Material, Information and Data produced by the
Recipient in the performance of the Scope of Work in a secure location
and on a secure network system whose address shall be provided to the
Provider and which will meet the standards legally in force in the
country where the Material is kept or the standards reasonably expected
among the industry to be followed for the storage of such Material,
whichever standards provide the highest level of safety and privacy.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient shall ensure that the [biological materials] are handled
in accordance with applicable WHO guidelines and national bio-safety
standards.

Shipping
^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Unless otherwise agreed, Provider shall be responsible for appropriately
packing and shipping the Materials for shipping and transportation.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient Institution shall use a courier with suitable skill and
experience to safely transport the Material in accordance with all
Applicable Laws. The Recipient Institution will bear the cost of
carriage and any necessary insurance. The Provider Institution makes no
charge for the Material / the Material is provided subject to the
reimbursement by the Recipient Institution to the Provider Institution
for its costs of extracting from storage and preparing the Material as
set out in [Appendix]. Risk in and responsibility for the Material shall
pass to the Recipient Institution once it is loaded onto transport as
organised by the Recipient Institution. If so requested by the Provider
Institution the Recipient Institution shall provide it with written
confirmation of the safe receipt of the Materials promptly after their
delivery to the Recipient Institution’s laboratory.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient undertakes the following with respect to the Materials:

-  To inform [organization] of shipments of Materials to entities
   inside/outside the [network] by recording in the [database].

-  In the event of further transfers within the [network], to do so in
   accordance with [agreement].

Data and results
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

    1. Research data must be generated using sound scientific techniques
    and processes;

    2. Research data must be accurately recorded in accordance with good
    scientific practices by the people conducting the research;

    3. Research data must be analyzed appropriately, without bias and in
    accordance with good scientific practices;

    4. Research data and the Results must be stored securely and be
    easily retrievable;

    5. Data trails must be kept to allow people to demonstrate easily
    and to reconstruct key decisions made during the conduct of the
    research, presentations made about the research and conclusions
    reached in respect of the research; and

    6. Each party must have the right, on not less than 30 days written
    notice, to visit any other party to verify that it is complying with
    the above practices and procedures.

Human rights, including patient confidentiality
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

The Parties acknowledge the importance of the protection of human and
animal subjects in any research, public health, or medical program. Both
Parties’ countries have adopted laws and regulations on the protection
of human and animal subjects involved in research. Each Party shall
undertake all activities contemplated by this MTA in accordance with all
applicable laws, regulations, and policies.

Example text
''''''''''''

In order to ensure that medical confidentiality and privacy of patients
are fully respected, Parties agree that Material and Data Set(s) and the
other Confidential Information shall contain no Personal Data. The
Supplier shall ensure that Material and Data Set(s) and the other
Confidential Information contain no Personal Data prior to any
disclosure or transmission of Material and Data Set (s) and other
Confidential Information.

Example text
''''''''''''

Personal Data and Human Samples Collection and Informed Consent: When
Personal Data and/or Human Samples are introduced to the Action by or on
behalf of a Beneficiary, such Beneficiary must ensure that: (1) the
Personal Data and the Human Samples are Processed in accordance with all
laws, rules, regulations and guidelines applicable to their collection,
use, handling, disposal and further Processing, including – without
limitation – data protection legislations; (2) if applicable, the
Personal Data and Human Samples are collected with voluntarily given
informed consent of the Donors of the Personal Data and Human Samples
covering the activities of the Action, including the collection,
processing, storage, use and transfer including the addressees of the
transfer of the Personal Data and Human Samples as provided for under
the Action, such informed consent must be revocable any time with effect
for the future; (3) the responsible ethics committee/Institutional
Review Board (IRB) has given its approval to the collection, processing,
storage, use and transfer of the Personal Data and Human Samples under
the Action, and (4) if applicable, the Donors of the Personal Data and
Human Samples have not withdrawn their informed consents.

Limited Scope of Personal Data and Human Samples That Can Be Used in the
Action: Beneficiaries will not introduce to the Action Personal Data and
Human Samples that are collected for reasons unrelated to the Action,
with limited exceptions. Personal Data and Human Samples shall be
accessed only for the purpose of the Project and the corresponding
agreements, i.e. the Grant Agreement and the Consortium Agreement.
Further Processing of such introduced Personal Data and Human Samples by
the accessing Beneficiary for own purposes or for purposes of Third
Parties is not permitted, unless expressly permitted in the informed
consent.

Use of Personal Data and Human Samples in the Action: Beneficiaries are
responsible for their Processing, storing, using and transferring of
Personal Data and/or Human Samples in compliance with the applicable
Data Protection Legislation and for purposes that are consistent with
the consent obtained, if applicable.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient agrees that Materials (a) will not be used in human
subjects, in clinical trials, or for diagnostic purposes involving human
subjects unless such use is expressly approved by the Provider in
writing and the Recipient’s use shall be in accordance with the
appertaining clinical protocol, informed consent and subject to any
required Institutional Review Board and / or Ethics Committee approvals
and / or other necessary approvals as applicable; (b) will not be used
for Commercial Purposes; and (c) will only be used by individuals who
are legally obligated, in the manner and to the extent required in the
applicable Material Transfer Record Forms, to allocate their respective
right in any and all Inventions (and any patent rights or other rights
arising therefrom); and (d) will not be given or made available to
[Members] or third parties unless approval to do so has been given on
the respective Material Transfer Record Form by the Provider and in
which case such transfer will also be under the conditions of this
Master MTA, and subject to the approval of the originator of the
materials.

Example text
''''''''''''

Any person who collects identifiable human materials shall ensure that
appropriate informed consent has been obtained from the sample sources,
including consent for storage for possible uses in future. Collection of
samples should follow acceptable standard procedures.

14. Monitoring, evaluation, and reporting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Example text
''''''''''''

Notices: All reports and notices or other documents that a Party is
required or may want to deliver to the other Party will be in writing
and delivered by (i) personal delivery or a nationally recognized
courier service and deemed to have been received at the time of
delivery, or (ii) registered or certified. The Recipient will provide
the supplier with a written progress report of the work performed
hereunder on (monthly) a basis. In addition, within [number of] days of
completion of the (work) (study), Recipient will provide supplier with a
final report, describing in a detailed manner the work performed, the
results obtained and the conclusions drawn therefrom.

15. Nature of relationship, warranties, liabilities, insurance, settlement of disputes, governing law and consistency
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Nature of relationship
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Independent Contractor: The relationship between the parties is that of
independent contractors and nothing in this Materials Transfer Agreement
will be construed as establishing an agency, partnership, joint venture,
or employment relationship between the parties . No Party has the
authority to act on behalf of the other Party, or to commit the other
Party in any manner at all or cause the name of the other Party to be
used in any way not specifically authorized by this Materials Transfer
Agreement.

Warranties
^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Disclaimer of Warranties: Provider provides the Material and Information
to Recipient “as is”. Recipient agrees to assume the sole responsibility
for their packing, transportation, handling, storage, use and disposal.
Provider makes no representation, warranty or guarantee, whether
expressed or implied, with respect to the Materials and Information,
including but not limited to, any representation as to the durability,
use, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement on the
proprietary rights of a third Party.

Example text
''''''''''''

Warranties of Non-Infringement - Each of the parties warrants to each of
the others that, to the best of its knowledge and belief (having made
reasonable enquiry of those of its employees involved in the Project or
likely to have relevant knowledge [and in the case of each Academic
Party any student involved in the Project], but not having made any
search of any public register) any advice or information given by it or
any of its employees [or students] who work on the Project, and the
content or use of any Results, Background or materials, works or
information provided in connection with the Project, will not constitute
or result in any infringement of third-party rights.

No Warranties - None of the parties makes any representation or gives
any warranty to any of the others that any advice or information given
by it or any of its employees [or students] who work on the Project, or
the content or use of any Results, Background or materials, works or
information provided in connection with the Project, will not constitute
or result in any infringement of third-party rights.

Other Warranties - The express undertakings and warranties given by the
parties in this Agreement are in lieu of all other warranties,
conditions, terms, undertakings and obligations, whether express or
implied by statute, common law, custom, trade usage, course of dealing
or in any other way. All of these are excluded to the fullest extent
permitted by law.

Example text
''''''''''''

Disclaimers - Except as set forth in [section], no party extends any
warranties of any kind, either express or implied, including but not
limited to the warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular
purpose with respect to the patent rights. In addition, each of the
parties expressly disclaims any warranty that the practice of the patent
rights will not infringe any patent, copyright, trademark, or other
rights of third parties. No party will make statements, representations,
or warranties, or accept liabilities or responsibilities, with respect
to or potentially involving the other party, that are inconsistent with
this section.

Limitations - To the maximum extent permitted by law, in no event will
any party be responsible for any incidental damages, consequential
damages, exemplary damages of any kind, lost goodwill, lost profits,
lost business and/or any indirect economic damages whatsoever regardless
of whether such damages arise from claims based upon contract,
negligence, tort (including strict liability or other legal theory), a
breach of any warranty or term of this agreement, and regardless of
whether a party was advised or had reason to know of the possibility of
incurring such damages in advance.

Example text
''''''''''''

In respect of any information or materials (including Results,
Background, and Confidential Information) supplied by one Beneficiary to
another hereunder or pursuant to the Grant Agreement, the supplying
Beneficiary shall be under no obligation or liability other than as
expressly stated herein and no warranty condition or representation of
any kind is made, given or to be implied as to the sufficiency, accuracy
or fitness for purpose of such information or materials, or the absence
of any infringement of any (intellectual) proprietary rights of Third
Parties or the other Beneficiaries. A recipient Beneficiary, by the use
of such information and materials, shall be entirely responsible for any
loss, damage or injury resulting from its use of such information and
materials.

Each Beneficiary (“Indemnitor”) shall indemnify each other Beneficiary
and their employees, Affiliated Entities, Sub-Contractors, Linked Third
Parties, and agents (“Indemnitee”) and defend and hold each of them
harmless, from and against loss, damage, liability, cost, expense, or
injury (including reasonable attorneys’ fees and expenses) (individually
a “Loss” and collectively, “Losses”) incurred by such Indemnitee
resulting from any claim, complaint, proceeding or cause of action
brought by a Third Party, including [Third Party Claims] alleging or
arising from (i) the material breach of any representation, warranty or
covenant made by the Indemnitor hereunder, (ii) gross negligence or
willful misconduct on the part of the Indemnitor in performing its
obligations under this Consortium Agreement, or, subject to [agreement]
(iii) infringement of Third Party intellectual property rights by such
Indemnitor, its employees, Sub-Contractors, Linked Third Parties,
Affiliated Entities or its agents; provided in each case that (a) the
foregoing obligation to indemnify shall not extend to claims for
indirect or consequential loss or damage, including but not limited to
loss of profit, revenue or contracts; and (b) the total limit of
liability of any Indemnitor to the Indemnitee collectively in respect of
any one claim or series of connected claims, shall not exceed the
financial value (of the Grant or of the in-kind contribution, as the
case may be, corresponding to that Indemnitor’s Action Share; and (c) an
Indemnitor shall not be obligated to indemnify an Indemnitee for any
Losses to the extent such Losses arise as a result of (i) the material
breach of any representation, warranty or covenant made by the
Indemnitee under this Consortium Agreement or (ii) any gross negligence
or willful misconduct on the part of any Indemnitee.

Nothing in this Consortium Agreement may be construed to limit (i) the
right of any party to bring an action for damages against any Third
Party, including claims for indirect, special or consequential damages,
based on any acts or omissions of such Third Party or (ii) the liability
of a party for personal injury or death resulting from the negligence of
such party or its employees, officers, directors, agents, or
representatives (as applicable).

The Indemnitee shall immediately advise the Indemnitor of any such Loss
or Third Party Claim in writing. The Indemnitor shall have the right to
select defense counsel and to direct the defense or settlement of any
claim which is the subject of this indemnity. The Indemnitee shall
reasonably co-operate with the Indemnitor and its legal representatives
in the investigation and defence of any such claim. The Indemnitee may
obtain representation by separate legal counsel, at its own expense. The
Indemnitee shall refrain from making any admission of liability or any
attempt to settle the claim without the Indemnitor’s prior written
consent.

Freedom to Operate - Without prejudice to any of the foregoing
provisions of [this agreement], each Beneficiary acknowledges that it
shall be solely responsible for ensuring that, to the best of its
knowledge, its activities under the Consortium Agreement, in particular
implementing the Action and making any Research Use of Results or
undertaking the Direct Exploitation of Results whether such Results are
owned by it or to which it has been granted Access Rights do not
infringe or misappropriate Third Party Intellectual Property.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient Institution understands that the Material is experimental
in nature, and may have hazardous properties. The Donor Institution
makes no representations and gives no warranties either express or
implied in relation to it: for example, no warranties are given about
quality or fitness for a particular purpose; or that the use of the
Material will not infringe any intellectual property or other rights of
third parties. The Donor Institution will not be liable for any use made
of the Material.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Recipient Institution understands that the Material may have
hazardous properties, contain infectious agents or pose other health and
safety risks. Subject to [clause], the Provider Institution makes no
representations and gives no warranties either express or implied in
relation to it: for example (without limitation), no warranties are
given about quality or fitness for a particular purpose, or freedom from
infection. The Provider Institution will not be liable for any use made
of the Material by the Recipient Institution. The Recipient Institution
will use the Material in accordance with good laboratory practice
standards, all due skill and care and with dignity, sensitivity and
respect. The Recipient Institution will comply with all Applicable Laws,
approvals, rules, codes of practice and regulations governing the
transportation, storage, use and disposal of the Material. The Recipient
Institution warrants that it will only use, or permit the use of the
Material in work that has ethical approval, as stated in [Appendix].

The Provider Institution warrants that where required by Applicable Laws
the Material has been obtained from humans with the appropriate consent
as required by the [relevant legislation] and with ethical approval and
the Provider Institution shall be liable for any claims arising due to
the breach of this warranty. The Provider Institution hereby grants to
the Recipient Institution a non-exclusive research licence to use the
Material for the Study only. The Provider Institution further warrants
that it has not provided any information (and does not intend to provide
any information) which has led or may lead to the Recipient Institution
being able to identify the person from whom the relevant material came.

Example text
''''''''''''

Any MATERIAL delivered pursuant to the Agreement is understood to be
experimental in nature and may have hazardous properties. The provider
makes no representations and extends no warranties of any kind, either
expressed or implied. There are no express or implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose, or that the use of
the material will not infringe any patent, copyright, trademark, or
other proprietary rights.

Example text
''''''''''''

This Research Material is provided as a service to the research
community. It is being supplied to recipient with no warranties, express
or implied, including any warranty of merchantability or fitness for a
particular purpose.

Provider makes no representations that the use of the Research Material
will not infringe any patent or proprietary rights of third parties.

Example text
''''''''''''

Provider makes no representations and extends no warranties of any kind,
either expressed or implied. Provider and its directors, officers,
employees, or agents assume no liability and make no representations in
connection with the Biological Material or the derivatives or the
information or their use by Recipient or its investigators. Recipient
will defend, indemnify and hold harmless Provider, its directors,
officers, employees, and agents from any damages, claims, or other
liabilities which may be alleged to result in connection with the
Biological Material, derivatives or information. There are no expressed
or implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular
purpose, or that the use of the Biological Material and related
information will not infringe any patent, copyright, trademark or other
rights.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Provider makes no warranties as to the safety of the Materials, or
as to the accuracy or correctness of any data provided with them.
Likewise, the provider does not make any warranties as to the quality,
viability, or purity (genetic or mechanical) of the Materials being
furnished. The Provider and the Recipient assume full responsibility for
complying with their respective national biosecurity and biosafety
regulations and rules as to import, export or release of biological
materials.

Example text
''''''''''''

The MTA should explain that the provider is giving the material “as is”
and does not promise that material will perform in any specific way. The
MTA should have a clause which states that the MTA may be amended at any
time by written mutual consent of the parties.

Example text
''''''''''''

The failure of either party to enforce or to exercise any right under
this Agreement does not constitute a waiver of that right and shall not
affect that party's right later to enforce or to exercise it.

The Recipient accepts that the Materials are supplied on an “as is”
basis, are experimental in nature and that [Supplier] makes no warranty
or representation, express or implied, as to the properties,
capabilities or safety of the Materials. Save in the case of death or
personal injury resulting from [Supplier]’s negligence, [Supplier]
hereby excludes to the fullest extent permitted by law all liability for
any action, claim, proceedings, demands, losses (including but not
limited to loss of profit), costs, awards damages and payments made by
Recipient that may arise (whether directly or indirectly) in any way
whatsoever from the supply of the Materials and their use by Recipient.

[Supplier] understands that any Invention which is licensed to it
pursuant to [Clause] is licensed on an “as is” basis. The Recipient
excludes all warranties, conditions or representations, express or
implied, as to such Invention's safety, quality, suitability for any
purpose or any other of its properties or capabilities.

No variation of or amendment to this Agreement shall bind either party
unless made in writing and signed by a duly authorised representative of
each party.

Liabilities
^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Liability: Each Party shall be solely responsible for the manner in
which it carries out its activities under this MTA. Thus, a Party shall
not be responsible for any loss, accident, damage or injury suffered or
caused by the other Party, or the staff or sub-contractors of the other
Party, in connection with, or as a result of, the activities under this
MTA.

Example text
''''''''''''

Indemnity - Each [Commercial] Party (the Indemnifying Party) will
indemnify each of the other parties and their employees [and students]
(the Indemnified Parties), and keep them fully and effectively
indemnified, against each and every claim made against any of the
Indemnified Parties as a result of that Indemnifying Party’s use of any
of the Results or any materials, works or information received from an
Indemnified Party pursuant to the terms of this Agreement, provided that
the Indemnified Party must:

    (i) promptly notify the Indemnifying Party of details of the claim;

    (ii) not make any admission in relation to the claim;

    (iii) allow the Indemnifying Party to have the conduct of the
    defense or settlement of the claim; and

    (iv) give the Indemnifying Party all reasonable assistance (at the
    Indemnifying Party’s expense) in dealing with the claim.

The indemnity in this clause will not apply to the extent that the claim
arises as a result of the Indemnified Party's negligence, its deliberate
breach of this Agreement, its breach of confidentiality obligation or
its knowing infringement any third party’s Intellectual Property.

No Liability for Others’ Use - None of the parties accepts any liability
or responsibility for any use which may be made by any other party of
any Results, nor for any reliance which may be placed by that other
party on any Results, nor for advice or information given in connection
with any Results.

No liability for Indirect Damages - The liability of each party to all
of the others for any breach of this Agreement, any negligence or
arising in any other way out of the subject matter of this Agreement,
the Project or the Results, will not extend to any indirect damages or
losses, or to any loss of profits, loss of revenue, loss of data, loss
of contracts or opportunity (whether direct or indirect), even if the
party bringing the claim has advised the other of the possibility of
those losses, or even if they were within the other party's
contemplation.

Limitation on Amount of Damages - The aggregate liability of each party
to all of the others for any or all breaches of this Agreement, any
negligence, or arising in any other way out of the subject matter of
this Agreement, the Project or the Results, will not exceed in total
[that party’s Financial Contribution][the portion of the External
Funding allocated to that party].

Liability Not Excluded - Nothing in this Agreement limits or excludes
any party's liability for:

(i) death or personal injury;

(ii) any fraud or for any sort of liability that, by law, cannot be
limited or excluded;

(iii) [any breach of the Funding Conditions;] or

(iv) any loss or damage caused by a deliberate breach of this Agreement
or any breach of confidentiality obligation.

Example text
''''''''''''

Liability - The Recipient hereby agrees to indemnify the Supplier and
their respective affiliates as the case may be from and against all
claims, demands, causes of action, damages or costs (including without
limitation reasonable outside attorneys’ fees and all costs associated
with the defense of the matter) arising out of (i) the breach by the
Recipient or its Representatives of any provisions of this Agreement,
(ii) the use by or on behalf of Recipient of the Material and Data
Set(s) or other Confidential Information, except to the extent any such
claims, demands, causes of action, damages or costs have been caused by
the breach by the Supplier of any provisions of this Agreement.

Example text
''''''''''''

Liability - Each Party shall be solely responsible for the manner in
which it carries out its part of the collaborative activities under this
Memorandum of Understanding. Thus, a Party shall not be responsible for
any loss, accident, damage or injury suffered or caused by the other
Party, or that other Party’s staff or sub-contractors, in connection
with, or as a result of, the collaboration under this Memorandum of
Understanding.

In the event that liability insurance for activities associated with
this Agreement has not been obtained by a Party at the time of the
signature of this Agreement, that Party shall obtain reasonable
liability insurance for the activities they conduct, such insurance to
be (a) reasonably acceptable to [partner] (b) name [partner] among the
parties insured and (c) obtained before the commencement of the
activities.

Example text
''''''''''''

University Liability - The University’s total liability for any and all
causes of action arising in connection with this agreement or the
transactions contemplated by this agreement, in aggregate, and
regardless of the form of action, whether in contract or in tort,
including negligence, or otherwise will be limited to direct damages not
exceeding in the aggregate one hundred percent of the amounts paid to
the University. Licensee waives and disclaims any right to recover any
damages in the aggregate in excess of such amount from the University.

Example text
''''''''''''

Except to the extent prohibited by law, the Recipient Institution
assumes all liability for damages which may arise from its receipt, use,
storage or disposal of the Material. The Donor Institution will not be
liable to the Recipient Institution for any loss, claim or demand made
by the Recipient Institution, or made against the Recipient Institution
by any other party, due to or arising from the use of the Material by
the Recipient Institution, except to the extent the law otherwise
requires.

| Neither party will be liable for any loss or damage resulting from its
  failure nor delay in performing its obligations hereunder to the
  extent that such failure or delay arises from circumstances beyond its
  control.
| The liability of either party for any breach of this Agreement, or
  arising in any other way out of the subject matter of this Agreement,
  will not extend to loss of business or profit, or to any indirect or
  consequential damages or losses.

Example text
''''''''''''

Except to the extent prohibited by Law and subject to [clause], the
Recipient Institution assumes all liability for damages which may arise
from its receipt, use, storage or disposal of the Material. The Provider
Institution will not be liable to the Recipient Institution for any
loss, claim or demand made by the Recipient Institution, or made against
the Recipient Institution by any other party, due to or arising from its
use, storage or disposal of the Material by the Recipient Institution,
except to the extent the law otherwise requires.

The liability of either party for any breach of this Agreement, or
arising in any other way out of the subject matter of this Agreement,
will not extend to loss of business or profit, or to any indirect or
consequential damages or losses.

Example text
''''''''''''

Except to the extent prohibited by law, the RECIPIENT assumes all
liability for damages that may arise from its use, storage or disposal
of the MATERIAL. The PROVIDER will not be liable to the RECIPIENT for
any loss, claim or demand made by the RECIPIENT, or made against the
RECIPIENT by any other party, due to or arising from the use of the
MATERIAL by the RECIPIENT, except to the extent permitted by law when
caused by the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the PROVIDER.

Example text
''''''''''''

Recipient understands that the Biological Material delivered hereby is
experimental in nature and should be used with prudence and appropriate
caution since not all of its characteristics are known. Recipient
assumes all liability for damages, which may arise from the use,
storage, handling or disposal of the Biological Material or its
derivatives.

Example text
''''''''''''

The recipient organization is responsible for the proper handling and
use of the material. The recipient or both the provider and recipient
are accountable for any misuse or consequences of use of the material.
Parties must agree on liability.

Governing Law
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Governing Law: This MTA shall be governed by and construed in accordance
with the laws of (country).

Example text
''''''''''''

This Agreement shall be governed by [English] Law, and the [English]
Courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction to deal with any dispute which
may arise out of or in connection with this Letter Agreement.

Example text
''''''''''''

This Agreement shall be governed by [English] Law, and the [English]
Courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction to deal with any dispute which
may arise out of or in connection with this Letter Agreement.

Example text
''''''''''''

This MTA shall be construed in accordance with Federal law as applied by
the Federal courts in the [District of Columbia].

Example text
''''''''''''

The MTA should state the governing law. Such laws may be the laws of the
provider’s and recipient’s country or both. Whatever the case may be,
the MTA should be prepared taking into consideration the governing laws
of the provider’s and recipient’s countries.

Example text
''''''''''''

This Agreement shall be governed by the laws of [England] and the
parties submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the [English] courts.

Settlement of Disputes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

If a dispute cannot be resolved through negotiations or other
non-binding means of the parties’ choice, disputes shall be subject to
binding arbitration on conditions that are mutually agreed by the
parties.

Breach of agreement
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

Breach: Any breach of this Agreement by the Recipient, including but not
limited to a breach of the scope of use will entitle the Provider to
immediately cease or cause to cease any transfer or shipment of samples
to the Recipient and to seek temporary or permanent relief against the
Recipient. Third Parties Beneficiaries to this Agreement shall be
notified promptly of such decision by Provider and shall cooperate fully
to prevent further transfer of samples to Recipient.

Example text
''''''''''''

The aggregate liability of each party to all of the others for any or
all breaches of this Agreement, any negligence, or arising in any other
way out of the subject matter of this Agreement, the Project or the
Results, will not exceed in total [that party’s Financial
Contribution][the portion of the External Funding allocated to that
party].

Consistency
^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

In the event of any inconsistency between the terms of this MTA on the
one hand, and the protocol for the study on the other hand, the terms of
this MTA will take precedence

Example text
''''''''''''

The provisions of this [agreement] shall be given precedence in
interpretation in the event of any conflict between this [agreement] and
the Implementing Letter.

Example text
''''''''''''

When preparing MTAs care should be taken not to contravene provisions of
other existing agreements pertaining to the human material in question.
If, for example, the human material is to be used together with a
material governed by a separate MTA, care should be taken under such
circumstances to avoid granting two or more parties conflicting rights
to the same material or product. Usually before negotiating a MTA,
parties correspond by mail to reach consensus on particular issues
regarding the material. Such correspondences, which include, for
example, signed letters indicating consent or willingness to exchange,
transfer or acquire the material, may be attached as annexes to the MTA.
Where parties have a memorandum of understanding (MoU) to exchange,
transfer or acquire human materials within a given research programme
over a specified period of time, the MTA should be prepared within the
framework of the MoU. The MoU usually does not specify details of the
human materials, but allows in principle, the exchange, transfer or
acquisition of the human materials.

15. Headings, amendments, waivers, and further assurances
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Headings
^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

The headings and subheadings in this Materials Transfer Agreement are
inserted for convenience of reference only and will not be used in
interpreting or construing the provisions of this Materials Transfer
Agreement.

Amendment
^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

No amendment or variation to this Materials Transfer Agreement will
operate to change or vary the terms, obligations or conditions hereof
except upon mutual agreement by both parties signed by an authorized
representative of each Party.

Example text
''''''''''''

This Agreement constitutes the complete and exclusive agreement between
Provider and Recipient with respect to the subject matter hereof, and
supersedes all prior oral or written understandings, communications or
agreements not specifically incorporated herein. This Agreement may not
be modified. If any provision of this Agreement is held to be
unenforceable for any reason, such provision shall be reformed only to
the extent necessary to make it enforceable, and such decision shall not
affect the enforceability (i) of such provision under other
circumstances, or (ii) of the remaining provisions hereof under all
circumstances.

Waivers
^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

No condoning, excusing or overlooking by any Party of any default,
breach or non-observance by any other Party at any time(s) regarding any
terms of this Materials Transfer Agreement operates as a waiver of that
Party’s rights under this Materials Transfer Agreement. A waiver of any
term or right under this Materials Transfer Agreement will be in writing
signed by the Party (or [third party]) entitled to the benefit of that
term or right, and is effective only to the extent set out in the
written waiver.

Further assurances
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example text
''''''''''''

The parties will promptly do such acts and execute and deliver to each
other such further instruments as may be required to give effect to the
intent expressed in this Materials Transfer Agreement.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Parties agree that this Agreement and any rights and obligations
under this Agreement are not transferable whether by operation of law or
otherwise. Any attempted assignment of this MTA by the Recipient to a
third party will be void and of no force and effect.

17. Duration and Surviving Provisions 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Example text
''''''''''''

This Agreement shall come into effect on the Effective Date and continue
in force until completion of the Purpose, including the reporting of the
results of the work performed by Recipient to the supplier, or earlier
termination of this agreement, whichever occurs sooner. Notwithstanding
expiration or earlier termination of this agreement, the rights and
obligations of the parties set forth in Articles … shall survive such
expiration or termination.

Example text
''''''''''''

Confidentiality - During implementation of the Action and for [number
of] years after the completion of the Action, unless another term is
agreed upon, any Beneficiary (the “Receiving Beneficiary”) must keep
confidential any Confidential Information that is disclosed by or on
behalf of another Beneficiary (the “Disclosing Beneficiary”) during the
course of the Action and identified as confidential at the time it is
disclosed. If information has been identified as confidential only
orally, it will be considered to be Confidential Information only if
this is confirmed in writing within [number of] Days of the oral
disclosure.

Example text
''''''''''''

Term - The obligations of [articles] shall remain in effect for each
subject disclosure of Confidential Information during the Disclosure
Period for a period of [number of] years from date of the termination of
the appertaining Projects for which Confidential Information has been
transferred.

Discontinue Use and Destroy Confidential Information Upon Request - The
Receiving Party agrees to discontinue its use of the Confidential
Information and destroy or return to the Disclosing Party all written
Confidential Information received hereunder or Confidential Information
that has been reduced to a written form upon completion of its use in
accordance with this [agreement] or upon request by the Disclosing Party
that supplied such Confidential Information (which ever shall occur
first); provided, however, one (1) copy of such Confidential Information
may be retained by the Receiving Party to preserve an archival record of
the same.

Termination of the Confidential Disclosure Agreement - The Confidential
Disclosure Agreement will terminate in its entirety upon the termination
of the Project of either the Disclosing Party or the Receiving Party or
if the Receiving Party is in breach of any of the conditions of this
Master CDA.

Example text
''''''''''''

Unless different period is stipulated by the Supplier, the obligations
of this [Article] shall continue for a period of ten years after the
expiration or termination of this Agreement.

Example text
''''''''''''

Upon completion of the aforesaid Purpose, each Party shall (unless
otherwise agreed by the Parties in writing) cease all use and make no
further use of the Information disclosed to it hereunder. Upon written
request from the Disclosing Party, the Receiving Party shall promptly
return to the Disclosing Party or destroy all of the Information
received, except that each Party may retain one copy of the Information
in its files to determine any continuing obligations hereunder.

Example text
''''''''''''

This Agreement shall commence on the date of last signature below and
will (subject to earlier termination pursuant to [clause]) continue for
the duration of the Research Project.

The Donor Institution may terminate this Agreement if the Recipient
Institution is in material breach of any of the terms of this Agreement
and, where the breach is capable of remedy, the Recipient Institution
has failed to remedy the same within one month of service of a written
notice from the Donor Institution specifying the breach and requiring it
to be remedied.

Upon completion of the Research Project or earlier termination under
[clause] the Recipient Institution will discontinue all use of the
Material, and upon the Donor Institution’s direction, return or destroy
the Material, unless permission to retain the Material is specifically
provided in writing by the Donor Institution to the Recipient
Institution.

Example text
''''''''''''

The Provider Institution has the right to terminate this agreement
forthwith at any time by means of written notice to Recipient
Institution if the ethical approval is withdrawn or if the Recipient
Institution is in breach of this Agreement. In the case of any
termination, the Recipient Institution shall immediately discontinue all
use of the Material and, at the Provider Institution's discretion,
promptly return or destroy (at the Recipient Institution's own cost) all
unused Material and provide written confirmation that this has been
completed. If requested, the Recipient Institution must certify that it
has complied in full with any such requirement of the Provider
Institution. Should an individual donor or their next of kin rescind
their consent, the Provider Institution will require and the Recipient
Institution agrees to discontinue using the appropriately identified
sample and return or destroy it in accordance with the Provider
Institution’s instructions.

Example text
''''''''''''

13. This Agreement will terminate on the earliest of the following
dates: (a) when the MATERIAL becomes generally available from third
parties, for example, though reagent catalogs or public depositories or
(b) on completion of the RECIPIENT's current research with the MATERIAL,
or (c) on thirty (30) days written notice by either party to the other,
or (d) on the date specified in an implementing letter, provided that:

    i. if termination should occur under 13(a), the RECIPIENT shall be
    bound to the PROVIDER by the least restrictive terms applicable to
    the MATERIAL obtained from the then-available resources; and

    | ii. if termination should occur under 13(b) or (d) above, the
      RECIPIENT will discontinue its use of the MATERIAL and will, upon
      direction of the PROVIDER, return or destroy any remaining
      MATERIAL. The RECIPIENT, at its discretion, will also either
      destroy the MODIFICATIONS or remain bound by the terms of this
      agreement as they apply to MODIFICATIONS;
    | and

    Iii. in the event the PROVIDER terminates this Agreement under 13(c)
    other than for breach of this Agreement or for cause such as an
    imminent health risk or patent infringement, the PROVIDER will defer
    the effective date of termination for a period of up to one year,
    upon request from the RECIPIENT, to permit completion of research in
    progress. Upon the effective date of termination, or if requested,
    the deferred effective date of termination, RECIPIENT will
    discontinue its use of the MATERIAL and will, upon direction of the
    PROVIDER, return or destroy any remaining MATERIAL. The RECIPIENT,
    at its discretion, will also either destroy the MODIFICATIONS or
    remain bound by the terms of this agreement as they apply to
    MODIFICATIONS.

[patent applications], [warranties], and [liability] shall survive
termination.

Example text
''''''''''''

When the Research Project is completed or three (3) years have elapsed,
whichever occurs first, the Research Material will be disposed of as
directed by Provider.

Example text
''''''''''''

| This agreement will terminate on the earliest of the following dates :
  (a) XXX years from the date of signing this agreement, or (b) on
  completion of the Recipient's current Research with the Biological
  Material, or (c) on thirty (30) days written notice by either party to
  the other.
| On termination for any reason, Recipient agrees to return or dispose
  of any remaining Biological Material, in accordance with the
  Provider's directions.

Example text
''''''''''''

| This contractual agreement shall remain in force until [date] and
  shall
| be automatically renewed until [date] unless the [body]
| decides otherwise.

Applicability: [agreement] shall cease to be applicable only upon
suspension or revocation of designation or recognition by [organization]
or upon formal withdrawal by the laboratory of its participation in the
[network] or upon mutual agreement of the [organization] and the
laboratory. Such a suspension, revocation or withdrawal shall not
relieve a laboratory of pre-existing obligations under [agreement].

Example text
''''''''''''

A date for termination of use of the material may be set to avoid
indefinite use of the material by the recipient organization. This date
may be extended by written mutual consent of the parties. At the
termination date, the provider organization may ask for the return of
the material or its destruction. It should be noted that terminating use
of the material does not render null and void other provisions of the
MTA. It should be mentioned if the material would be stored for future
unknown uses.

A disposal plan for the materials must be described in the MTA,
including methods of disposal. Disposal of material must be sufficiently
documented.

The MTA may be terminated by either party providing a written notice in
an agreed time frame. Parties must, however, make provisions for benefit
sharing of any accruing or anticipated future benefit at the point of
termination.

.. [1]
   `*http://www.who.int/csr/research-and-development/consultations/MTA-meeting-report.pdf* <http://www.who.int/csr/research-and-development/consultations/MTA-meeting-report.pdf>`__

.. [2]
   Past consultations heard this term may need defining but no examples
   have been identified to date.

.. [3]
   `*http://www.who.int/medicines/ebola-treatment/data-sharing\_phe/en/* <http://www.who.int/medicines/ebola-treatment/data-sharing_phe/en/>`__

.. [4]
   In the specific context of this agreement, materials meant something
   other than the tangible biological goods being transferred.
